* Paper: Freeing Software and Opening Space: Social Forums and the Cultural Politics of Technology (PDF): Jeffrey Juris, Giuseppe Caruso, and Lorenzo Mosca 

URL = http://www.networked-politics.info/berkeley/reader/freesoft_openspace-jeffjurispdf/ [http://www.networked-politics.info/?page_id=173]

(in case URL not functions, please request copy from  mayo.fuster@eui.eu )

examine the use of ICT by Social Forums in Brazil, India, Europe and the US, whose experiences show that software and technology decisions are inherently political. Whilst the adoption of Free and Open Software reflects political goals of Social Forums and can facilitate interactive communication and grassroots participation, they also can create dependence on a small group of technical experts and raise issues of unequal access to technological knowledge and resources across gender, class, racial, and geographic divides.


=Description=

"   In this article we explore what we refer to as the “cultural politics of
technology” within the social forums through a comparative analysis of the
political goals and struggles associated with ICT use within the global,
European, and US social forum processes. By cultural politics of technol-
ogy we mean the conflicts between different political visions associated
with particular uses and understandings of technology. As we shall see,
similar issues and debates have surfaced within each of these distinct polit-
ical and cultural contexts. In particular, conflicts surrounding FS, open-
ness, efficiency, and the relationship between technicians and other forum
organizers have been apparent in each case. In what follows, we argue that
decisions regarding technology and software should be seen as political, not
technical considerations. Indeed, given that it is non-proprietary, open,
and collaborative, FS reflects the goals of the WSF. We further contend
that struggles over software and technology reflect conflicts over the nature
of the Forum itself."



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Governance]]