'''Software Radio'''

URL = http://www.futuresalon.org/2005/07/software_radio_.html


Interview with Matt Ettus, one of the driving forces behind GNU Software Radio.

For more information on the topic, see also the entry on [[Software-defined Radio]]


=Session Abstract=


"Matt Ettus, GNU Radio team member and Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) creator, will be discussing both the technical and regulatory aspects of open source software radio, and how GNU Radio and the USRP fit in. He will also cover software radio's impact on spectrum policy, and will conclude with a small demo of the USRP.

In a software radio, software defines the transmitted waveforms, and software demodulates the received waveforms. GNU Radio is an open source software radio framework which allows for experimentation, rapid prototyping and deployment of complex Software Radio systems on generic microprocessors. Software radio is becoming increasingly important as a technology for implementing communication systems. By performing most or all processing in software, it allows for extremely versatile radio systems and makes multi-standard systems possible.

The Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) is a hardware component which allows for the physical realization of complex wideband software radios using commodity PCs. It allows for up to 4 antennas, enabling MIMO and Smart Antenna systems. The hardware design is completely open and free."


=Bio of Matt Ettus


"Matt Ettus, founder of Ettus Research LLC, has been working in wireless design for 8 years, and has extensive experience in ASIC-, FPGA-, and software-based communication systems, as well as System-on-chip RF architecture and board-level RF design. Matt is a major contributor to the GNU Radio project, a free framework for Software Radio, and is the creator of the Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP). He holds an MS in Electrical and Computer Engineering from Carnegie Mellon University, and dual BS degrees in EE and CS."


[[Category:Webcasts]]