='''Soft Security is a mode of self governance and unobtrusive security for online communities.'''=

Soft Security emerged out of a community necessity within [http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl? Meatball wiki] to have a way to deal with potential vandalizing, spamming, and general attacks upon their very open system.

The nature of Meatball Wiki is to be a community space that contains pages that are opnly editable by anyone. Some of the potential "dangers" include: 

*An attacker, such as an angry user who might attack another community member with words or worse.

*A "klutz", or person who accidentally or inadvertantly destroys community work.

*A transient "vandal" who purposefully destroys work for fun, or to "spam" the community to boost their search engine rankings.

Soft Security deals with the open nature of the wiki system and it's potential dangers with a combination of technological and social solutions that have emerged from the community that makes up meatball wiki. All of the social and technological solutions rely upon the active engagement of the majority Meatball Wiki community to work. This leverages the inherent value (or streangth in numbers) of the network of people who make up Meatball wiki. Thus, Soft Security is only possible through ''collective'' action.

For instance, one Soft Security technological solution is to create an audit trail that anyone can view ([http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?RecentChanges recent changes]), and a mechanism that allows anyone to reverse a change. But this solution requires that enough people will care enough to look at the [http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?RecentChanges recent changes] of Meatball Wiki, and then will care enough to go and reverse the change when needed. 


The core social principles of Soft Security are (quoted from [http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?SoftSecurity MeatBall Wiki]):

*[http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?AssumeGoodFaith AssumeGoodFaith]. People are almost always trying to be helpful; so, we apply the PrincipleOfFirstTrust, confident that occasional bad will be overwhelmed by the good. 

*[http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?PeerReview PeerReview]. Your peers can ensure that you don't damage the system. 

*[http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?ForgiveAndForget ForgiveAndForget]. Even well-intentioned people make mistakes. They don't need to be permanent. 

*[http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?LimitDamage LimitDamage]. When unpreventable mistakes are made, keep the damage within tolerable limits. 

*[http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?FairProcess FairProcess]. Kim and Mauborgne's theory that being transparent and giving everyone a voice are essential management skills. 

*[http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?NonViolence NonViolence]. Do no violence lest violence seek you. 



The core systemic principles of Soft Security are (quoted from [http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?SoftSecurity MeatBall Wiki]):

*[http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?ReversibleChange ReversibleChange] (as discussed above). If anything that can be done, can be undone, no damage need be permanent. Version control is one way of making changes reversible. You can reverse a change without knowing who made it originally. 

*[http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?DelayAction DelayAction]. When you can't reverse a change, delay that action until PeerReview has a chance to prevent disaster. 

*[http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?EnlargeSpace EnlargeSpace]. In order to preserve [http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?GlobalResource GlobalResources], create more public space. 

*[http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?DevolvePower DevolvePower]. Hand over as much control of the community to the community. 











See: [http://www.usemod.com/cgi-bin/mb.pl?SoftSecurity MeatBall Wiki:SoftSecurity]



[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]