
'''Sohodojo'''


URL = http://sohodojo.com/about_sohodojo.html


=Description=

"Sohodojo is an independent, non-profit (U.S. 501(C)(3)) applied research and development laboratory with an associated education mission to support solo and family-based microenterprise and small business entrepreneurs in rural and distressed urban communities. We pursue two threads of interrelated activity:

    
* integrating existing, and creating "missing link," software technologies to support the creation and sustainability of decentralized and distributed microenterprise and small business networks (the back-end of fine-grained supply chain networks), and
    
* envisioning and creating Internet-based software (an E-commerce engine or front-end) to support alternative markets that function as persistent social/economic networks based on person-to-person rather than person-to-product relationships within consumer purchase dynamics.

Sohodojo is working to populate a sustainable "parallel universe" that can be characterized as the Small Is Good World. Not a replacement to or a "better than" alternative to the dominant Big Is Good World, the Small Is Good World functions as a moderator or governor to the excesses of the Big Is Good World.

By building socio-economic networks emphasizing the "Who, How, and Why" of consumer purchase dynamics, we are creating markets that are a sustainable alternative to the dominant markets based on price and distribution channel control (the "How much and Where" of consumption dynamics). The E-commerce engine of these alternative markets will be story-driven and game-oriented to maximize the creation and maintenance of person-to-person relationships.

The structure of these new entrepreneurial ventures is the extended network enterprise rather than the conventional corporate organization-centric enterprise. The most fine-grained participant in such ventures is the solo entrepreneur (the "nanocorp") rather than the employee. These solo entrepreneurs lead Portfolio Lives, participating in a collection of such network enterprises and dynamic projects, rather than living the job-centric life of the traditional employee.

Sohodojo is committed to making the results of its applied research and development available under Open Source and Open Content licenses. Research collaborations are facilitated through our world-class Advisory Board. Our First-Of-A-Kind business network is The Chandler Guild of soybean-wax candlemakers."
(http://sohodojo.com/about_sohodojo.html)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Business]]