

=Status=

==Solana's Network State Projects, 2025==

Niklas Anziger:

 "Solana has outpaced Ethereum in real-network state progress."

"Ethereum blazed the trail. Vitalik’s Zuzalu was a breakthrough that introduced the popup city model as an initial market test for startup societies. But since then, many Ethereum-aligned projects have stalled or lowered their ambition (if you agree with my north star). Forma (a direct Solana spinout) announced a government partnership with Kazakhstan & are talking to more. Ipê City (somewhat Solana aligned) worked on the Florianopolis Digital Economic Zone in Brazil. Infinita launched $LIVES on Solana. Venture Launch is organizing Solana Próspera in October—an initiative with Nomadz, a community of Solana builders.

Credit where due: Ethereum-aligned projects like Zuitzerland, Frontier Tower and Edge City have all shown strong participation numbers - Edge City hit 11k+. But numbers alone aren’t what matters, in my opinion. We’ve already known that tech events attract crowds. Having people live together for longer periods of time is a good extension of that, but towards what end? If there is no articulated goal or plan towards partial sovereignty, it’s a longer event (and at that far away from a 4-year college experience - and we don’t call college a society).

That’s why my personal favorite Ethereum-aligned project is Crecimiento in Argentina, unfortunately they were not presenting this time. They have a clearly articulated governance goal: make Argentina a crypto nation. The events and popup are a means towards that end.

It seemed to me the Solana projects have more clearly understood that directionality, actively negotiating to become layer-1s, and engaging as layer-2s in layer-1s like Próspera."

(https://www.infinitacitytimes.com/p/network-state-reality-check-how-much)


[[Category:Network Nations]]