
'''= "ensure that all Australians have the ability to access clean, safe, affordable power".'''

URL = http://www.solarcitizens.org.au/


=Description=

"Australia is one of the sunniest continents on earth, so producing power from the sun just makes sense.

1.4 million rooftop power stations are now lighting up homes around the country. And many more households are looking to solar as a way to manage their energy bills, creating cleaner energy along the way.

The solar rooftop revolution is happening at an astounding pace - the price of solar is plummeting, making solar more affordable than ever, and rates of uptake continue to rise rapidly.  

But despite the many reasons to go solar, there obstacles things in our way. Some big energy companies don’t want to see Australians take back control of their own energy needs. They want to make connecting to solar harder, not easier.  


'''* What is Solar Citizens?'''

Solar Citizens is an independent community based organisation working to protect and grow solar in Australia. We advocate for the rights of more than 5 million solar owners and the millions more who wish to go solar.

We believe that when millions of solar owners and supporters stand together, we can be powerful. We run campaigns that use people power to put pressure on decision makers and bring about the best outcomes for solar owners and people who want solar.

We’re independent, meaning that we don’t support any one political party, company or organisation over another.

We’re a registered not-for-profit, relying on the generosity of our large donors and many hundreds of smaller individual donors to help us fund campaigns to protect and grow solar.

We support a vision of an Australia where a major portion of our electricity is generated from the sun, where the rights of solar owners are protected and where all Australians are able to install solar on their homes.

If you want to ensure your rights as a solar owner are protected or if you believe in a solar future for all Australians join Solar Citizens today. 


'''* Who is a Solar Citizen?'''

A Solar Citizen is any Australian who supports the use of solar power - either installing it themselves or working to see greater use of solar in their community.

Solar Citizens include:

* The 2.5 million people who live in one of Australia's one 1.4 million homes that have solar panels on the roof

* The 1.5 million people who live in one of the 600,000+ homes with solar hot water

* The 15,500 people who work in the solar industry helping Aussie households install solar

* Any one who would one day like to have solar on their roof 

* Any one starting up or investing in a community owned solar project

 *Any one who thinks putting a panel on every Australian rooftop just makes sense

While some would like to see control of energy generation be kept in the hands of a few big power companies, if Solar Citizens work together we can ensure that all Australians have the ability to access clean, safe, affordable power. Join Solar Citizens today."
(http://www.solarcitizens.org.au/about_us)


[[Category:Australia]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Energy]]