
'''= energy-efficient blockchain''' 

URL = https://solana.com/


=Description=

"The Solana network is designed to be a high-performance blockchain. These design decisions also mean the network is incredibly energy efficient. In this first of many reviews of the impact of the Solana ecosystem, the Solana Foundation can report that a transaction on Solana takes less energy than two Google searches, and 24 times less energy than charging your phone.

In May 2021, the Solana Foundation contracted Robert Murphy, an energy and climate advisor, to help initially frame the environmental impact of transactions performed on the Solana global state machine. Transactions are the fundamental building blocks of Solana: Purchasing an NFT, making a trade, or other activities you can perform using Solana are all transactions.

As a proof of stake network, the security of the network is not dependent on energy usage. On Solana, there is no need for energy-intensive mining, meaning the network is extremely environmentally efficient. And thanks to a number of key technical innovations, like proof of history and parallel processing, activities on Solana take much less energy than you might think.

This report provided a dynamic analysis that can be recalculated as the network grows. In the November 2021 update, the Solana Foundation determined that a single Solana transaction takes 0.00051 kWh, or 1,836 Joules, of energy."

(https://solana.com/news/solana-energy-usage-report-november-2021)

[[Category:Energy]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]