
URL = https://joinmosaic.com/

=Description=

'''1.'''

"What’s a maker in the energy sector? Anyone who’s creating their own energy, and, perhaps, sharing it with others. [[Solar Mosaic]] enables thousands of people to have access to affordable solar loans, gives investors opportunities to fund renewable power, and allows clean energy supporters the power to spread the wealth of energy from the sun throughout their communities. Respected industry leader, Lisa Gansky​,​ is on the board." (http://www.web-strategist.com/blog/2015/04/23/how-the-collaborative-economy-is-impacting-the-energy-sector/)


'''2. James Lester''' [http://www.cleantechfinance.net/2012/energy-crowdfunding/]:

"Solar Mosaic has said it wants to be the “Kickstarter for solar”, enabling people to invest their own money into solar energy projects large and small. In Solar Mosaic’s case, once he rules surrounding equity crowdfunding are written, investors will earn a return from each project’s eventual revenue. Solar Mosaic thus far has raised nearly $400,000 from over 400 investors to finance six solar power plants. Together, Mosaic’s first six projects created 120 kW of clean solar energy in California and Arizona, produced 2,350 job hours and will save community organizations an estimated $438,000 on their utility bills over the next 20 years.

Solar Mosaic recently received $2.5 million in Series A funding. The round was led by Spring Ventures with the participation of Serious Change, Jim Sandler, Steve Wolf, Tom Chi, and a group of angels from the “Toniic” investor network. The company says it will use the new funding to build out its platform for crowdfunding on a larger scale.

Daniel Rosen, co-founder of Solar Mosaic stated, “solar loans are backed by a revenue-producing asset (electricity) and the building owners are just continuing to pay for the electricity that they are used to paying for day in and day out. There is little risk to investors that the building’s owners will default on their electricity payments, particularly since they are also saving money on their energy bills from day one. In addition the costs, timelines and returns for solar panels are pretty transparent as the technology has become increasingly commoditized.”

On April 24th, Solar Mosaic filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and several states to offer Solar Power Notes to the public, with proceeds going to fund solar power projects. They are now in what is called a Quiet Period, which is from the time a company files a registration statement with the SEC until SEC staff declare the registration statement “effective.” During that period, the federal securities laws limit what information a company and related parties can release to the public.'

=More Information=

* [[Energy Crowdfunding Platforms]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Energy]]