
= SOLEDO: THE EMPATHIC CURRENCY FOR A SUSTAINABLE ENERGY MODEL TO HELP DEVELOPING COUNTRIES AND SMALL COMMUNITIES

URL = http://cetri-tires.org/press/projects/soledo-the-empathic-currency/


=Description=

"To put this in percentage, the inequality in annual economic incomes between western industrialized countries and the South of the World is of 10 to 1 (I.I.C. – Income Inequality Critical).

The same incidence (10 to 1) is shown also by the comparison of annual average incomes and annual average cost of energy produced with nuclear and fossil fuels.

The present energy model – cost-intensive, polluting, and obsolete for what concerns the technologies and the efficiency in energy conversion – will NEVER consent to sustain an economic and energy development, fundamental for the full achievement of human, social and democratic rights in the South of the World (E.I.C. – Energy Inequality Critical).

We need a sharp shift in our path, that can bring both a democratic and sustainable energy revolution through Renewable Energy Sources and the valorization of local resources in the South of the World.
Soledo is the way to join these needs with the capacity of using the Sun as a democratic source of energy that belongs to everyone.

Soledo will represent for Rural Communities in the South of the World the tool to achieve full self-determination, both in a social and in an economic way, through a process of individual and collective responsibilization in the Communities that participate to the project.

SOLEDO is an “empathic currency” that takes his value from a proposal of exchange between energy – produced by photovoltaic plants – and a series of goods – including handcrafted products, agricultural products, food and/or an agreement for the provision of hospitality services.

Everything will be carried out under the operative coordination of CETRI-TIRES and granted of the Local Institutions (Municipalities) involved in the project.

SOLEDO is converted by CETRI-TIRES through the SOLEDO BANK, with an exchange ratio of 1/1 with Renewable Watts produced by stand alone photovoltaic plants.

1 SOLEDO = 1 Wp = 1 WR (Renewable Watt, so named by CETRI-TIRES)

In the process of conversion the average international weighed price per Watt of Photovoltaic technology utilized by industries and commercial operators (in mounting kits, installation not included) stand alone typology (plants equipped with storage systems optimized for areas that lack of electric grids).
CETRI-TIRES Scientific Committee can vaunt consolidated reletionships with the most important industrial districts that produce Photovoltaic components; these relationships have been set up through market researches during the years and with cooperation with international university research centers.

These privileged relationships can ensure the access to competitive price lists, in a logic of short supply chain where there’s no room for intermediations unsustainable to the project’s development.
Today the purchase of a high-quality stand alone Photovoltaic plant of about 1.000 Wp in mounting kit (modules, inverter, accessories, electric cables, electric panels, batteries for storage) costs about 3.000 USD (average weighed cost calculated by CETRI-TIRES Scientific Committee – 31 October 2012).

Dividing the cost (3.000 USD) by the output power (1.000 Wp) we obtain a value of 3,00 USD per Watt (average cost per Watt).

Such average cost will be then converted, through the local offices of SOLEDO BANK, in hours of work necessary for the production of the goods included in a bundle of reference (hospitality, local food, handcrafted goods, etc.) made available by local communities and given as a countervalue for the technologies provided.

The economic evaluation for the production of the goods included in the bundle that are given in exchange for the technologies received is evaluated in equivalent hours of work and is carried out by CETRI-TIRES Scientific Committee in compliance with social, economic and cultural equity for the people and with attention for the sustainability of the ratio work hours/cost of energy.

CETRI-TIRES therefore proposes a model of economic and social equity based on a conversion ENERGY/GOODS not linked to strong currencies (EURO, US DOLLARS, YEN, YUAN) as a mean of exchange, but based on the equivalent HOURS OF WORK necessary for the production of the goods contained in a bundle of reference (hospitality, local food, handcrafted products, etc.). This allows the construction of a new economic paradigm where social justice and respect of human dignity are a resource – rather than a problem.
SOLEDO is a contract-currency emitted by CETRI-TIRES through HUMANITARIAN ASSOCIATIONS – NGOs – ONLUS (named “local offices” of SOLEDO BANK) to cover the financing of the interventions described in detail in the plan of energy needs of the related Municipality (preliminary energy and social plan)."
(http://cetri-tires.org/press/projects/soledo-the-empathic-currency/)

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Money]]