
'''Portraits of the Solidarity Economy = 7 short films on the [[Solidarity Economy]] in NYC'''

=Description=

"We are in the midst of a crisis of economic imagination. Many of us are taught (and believe) that there is only one way to do business: cut-throat competition. We start thinking businesses focused on anything other than profit will fail. We grow up believing  we're stuck with what we've got, even though these kinds of enterprise harm communities, workers, and the environment.

In New York City many are imagining--and creating--another way to do business. They are economic innovators combining new and old practices to align their businesses and organizations with strong values of justice, sustainability, democracy, and cooperation. Together, they make up something called the solidarity economy.

We're bringing the stories of these economic innovators to life through 7 short films, 1 stop-motion animation, and an informational website. Each film portrait examines the values and practices of a given business or organization through the story of an individual leader. We've included a reiki practitioner at a worker co-operative in Brooklyn; two co-founders of Brooklyn food co-operatives, including the most successful food co-op in America; a co-founder of a barter network for artists; a member of a 32-year-old successful intentional community on Staten Island; a community resident advocating for participatory budgeting in East Harlem; a board member at a Lower East Side community development credit union; and a veteran community gardens advocate in the Bronx. Each film is between 3-7 minutes long and is shot on location in people's homes, businesses, and organizations."
(http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/caroline/portraits-of-the-solidarity-economy)


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:EthicalEconomy]]