
=Case Study=

Ilcheong Yi, Fulvia Farinelli, and Raymond Landveld:

"Emergence of Argentinean SSE is in parallel with the
formation of the working class at the end of the 19th century.
Immigrant workers from Spain and Italy, many of whom had
been involved with communist and socialist movements and
unions, established mutuals, mutual aid societies, benevolent
societies, and renters’ associations, to better meet the urban
workers’ needs. In rural areas, cooperatives organized by
small farmers emerged as a way to cope with larger, more
powerful companies. These SSEOEs sought not only to
address problems affecting the livelihoods but also to attain
social recognition and mobilize the masses politically, such
as the case of justicialismo during the era of Peronism.
Dramatic growth of cooperative movement in the last half of
20th century continued in the 2000s, and expanded from rural
to urban areas, mainly in the form of worker cooperatives
due to the employment issues of the neoliberal regime.

Some cooperatives became bureaucratic and lacking in
principles, while new collective actions and new social
movement around the principles and visions of SSE, such as
worker-recuperated enterprises (empresas recuperadas por
sus trabajadores, ERTs which occupy their workplaces and
make them productive again), emerged. 
The Kirchner government established various public
policies to support SSE financially and politically as well
as social movements to reduce the unemployment rate,
making the number of cooperatives increase nine times in
the decade between 2001 and 2010. Although these policies
were favourable to the SSE sector, the strength of top-down
initiatives is uncertain as cooperatives lost their radical
aspect in exchange for economic and technical assistance,
which leaves cooperatives vulnerable to political decisions."

(https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/social_and_solidarity_economy_29_march_2023.pdf)


=Policy= 

"Policies of local governments, in particular governments
of big cities such as Buenos Aires, became a significant factor
to determine the potential and nature of SSEOEs. For instance,
in December 2020, during the confinement period introduced
against the COVID pandemic, the City of Buenos Aires (CABA)
adopted a "Law for the Promotion of the Social Economy in
the City of Buenos Aires” (Law 6.376), under the auspices of
the local Ministry of Human Development and Habitat. Its
aim is to generate genuine income sources and employment
opportunities for SSE productive units, which are expected to
become an important driver of inclusion, social justice and
sustainable development in Buenos Aires."

To this purpose, four key support measures have been introduced:

1. Tax exemptions for SSE enterprises.

2. A dedicated credit line at Banco Ciudad for
public purchases. 

3. Preferential public procurement by
the City of Buenos Aires. 

4. Public-private sector governance for the newly
created investment fund called FONDES.


In addition, two important regulatory reforms have been
announced, namely the creation of an SSE register called
RUPEPyS (Register of Productive Units of the Popular and
Social Economy) and the adoption of a tax benefits regime
for private investors contributing to FONDES."

(https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/social_and_solidarity_economy_29_march_2023.pdf)


[[Category:Argentina]]

[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:Solidarity Economy]]