
'''= "A peer support community dedicated to helping people navigate the divisive impacts of oppressive ideologies".'''

URL = https://www.solidgroundsupport.com/


=Description=

"We offer peer support to people struggling to navigate increasingly authoritarian environments in their school, workplace, church or communities. We seek to cultivate an environment in which participants feel free to share their experiences and to receive/offer validation, support and camaraderie with others with Critical Social Justice (CSJ) (aka “woke”), Covid mandates, in the same situation.

We seek to maintain a friendly and pleasant peer support environment to help grapple with the impact of CSJ (“woke”), Covid mandates, and other oppressive ideologies. 


Although we are a diverse group with varying viewpoints, we seek to foster the following:

#Freedom of speech
#Intelligent discourse
#Diversity of opinion
#Authentic human connection 
#Organic community-building


Increasingly, employees and students find themselves pressured to endorse a particular worldview, take measures  or endure coerced medical treatment under the threat of job dismissal, failing grades, or social ostracization. Many people feel bullied into proclaiming and denouncing their white privilege (or oppression, depending on skin color), announcing their pronouns, and/or participating in trainings intended to coerce them into viewing the world through the lens of Critical Social Justice (CSJ). 

Others have been fired from their job, demoted or canceled for voicing dissent, refusing a vaccine, or even for merely not appearing sufficiently enthusiastic about woke ideology or the dominant Covid narrative. Since intolerance of viewpoint diversity is part and parcel to the CSJ / authoritarian world view, many people with concerns about the tenets of CSJ and/or the Covid narrative are reluctant to speak out. For some of us, this presents a moral dilemma. Should we feign agreement with ideas we find objectionable to maintain our employment and get along with peers or stand up for our principles and risk potential job loss and social censure? 

This near impossible situation often results in a crisis of conscience. The impact of the pressure to demonstrate adherence to a CSJ and/or Covid narrative/worldview on physical and mental well being is significant. Many people report feeling intimidated and abused by their employer’s attempts to coerce them into accepting such a worldview. Many people also report self-isolating due to fear of “saying the wrong thing“ or being asked to voice ideas that violate their conscience. This results in anxiety, social isolation and loneliness, often resulting in an inability to perform at work or school to the extreme that necessitates taking a leave of absence or even leaving their job or school.

Working, studying or living in an environment dominated by Critical Social Justice ideology (CSJ – aka “woke”) or deviating from the COVID mandates (refusing a vaccination, refusing to wear a mask) can be profoundly alienating and anxiety-provoking. When we are surrounded by people who are demanding we must demonstrate adherence to ideas and belief systems we simply do not believe, we may even start to question the reality of our own senses. Some of us fear we may be secretly racist or transphobic for daring to question the logic of CSJ (aka “woke”) ideas. Others may worry they are endangering the public health for refusing to wear a mask or receive a Covid-19 vaccination. 

Peer support offers people the opportunity to speak freely with others, without fear of repudiation or censorship, about their experiences. Many people are relieved to know they are not alone in their concerns and that they are not simply “imagining” the intolerant and authoritarian manner in which these ideologies are being imposed."

(https://solidgroundsupport.com/about/)


[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:Identity Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]