= one of the two main forms (the other is [[CNC]]), of [[Digital Fabrication]]


=Description=

Dianna Pfeiffer:

"Solid free-form fabrication refers to what
are currently called rapid prototyping and
manufacturing (RP&M), or additive, processes.
These tools create complex three-dimensional
objects by successively layering up (adding) material
into a complex physical form. They are comprised
of an enclosed build-chamber, robotic head and
material feed system, which is attached to, or
includes a computer control interface.

'''Common methods of solid free-form fabrication are [[3D Printing]] (3DP), [[Selective Laser Sintering]] (SLS), [[Stereo-lithography]] (SLA), [[Fused Deposition Modeling]] (FDM), and [[Laminated Object Manufacturing]] (LOM)''', among others. 

Each of
these methods automatically details a digital 3D
model through the tool’s associated control software
as a series of thin, horizontal cross-sections. These
slices are then physically built-up from adhered
powders of plaster, cornstarch or other resins in
3D Printing, or as laser-fused powders (polymers,
ceramics, metal alloys and composites) for SLS.
SLA methods are confined to laser-cured liquid
resins, while FDM uses extruded filaments of
thermosetting materials (ABS, epoxy). LOM
adheres cutout cross-sections of paper, polymers,
ceramics, or composites. (Schodek 281-293) In the
active open-source maker communities of RP&M
machines like RepRap, Fab@Home, and CandyFab,
similar processes to FDM and 3DP use materials
that users are able to configure themselves, ranging
from chocolate to catalyzing plastics.

RP&M are largely hands-off machines in that
the processes cannot be modified on the fly while
the job is in progress, and are only minimally
configurable with the software that controls the
machine. Reportedly, only the very costly industrial
versions and the relatively cheap DIY open-source
varieties encourage user control over the fabrication
process. This means the quality of the finished
product is largely determined by two factors: the
geometry of the digital model before it is sent to the
machine and the machine’s default capabilities to
handle it.

Two main drawbacks users continue to struggle
with in free-form fabrication are imperfect surface
resolution that results in stair-stepped vertical
curvature, and the overall size constraints of the
build chamber. There is also an underlying issue that
these processes must overcome, namely that today’s
additive processes primarily build objects from a
single, inert material. Though developments are on
the horizon, it is beyond most of these machine’s
current capabilities to create objects, like integrated
circuits, from combinations of material properties
and behaviors within a single fabrication job.

(Gershenfeld 101) Nevertheless, the diminishing
costs of these machines, and their increasingly
Digital TOOLS, DISTRIBUTED MAKING & DESIGN
desirable output coupled with ease of use have led
them to be adopted into numerous environments
whether professional, educational, industrial or
residential."
(http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-12152009-131820/unrestricted/Pfeiffer_DV_T_2009.pdf)


[[Category:Manufacturing]]