'''= "a protocol for confidential transactions on public blockchains, such as those required for asset
transfers with on-chain settlement".''' [https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/317.pdf]

=Contextual Citation=

"a system supporting strong confidentiality and high transaction rates for bankintermediated
ledgers. Solidus not only conceals transaction values,
but also provides the much more technically challenging property
of transaction-graph confidentiality. This means that a transaction’s
sender and receiver cannot be publicly identified."
(https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/317.pdf)

=Description=

"Blockchains and more general distributed ledgers are becoming
increasingly popular as efficient, reliable, and persistent records of
data and transactions. Unfortunately, they ensure reliability and correctness
by making all data public, raising confidentiality concerns
that eliminate many potential uses.

In this paper we present Solidus, a protocol for confidential transactions
on public blockchains, such as those required for asset
transfers with on-chain settlement. Solidus operates in a framework
based on real-world financial institutions: a modest number
of banks each maintain a large number of user accounts. Within
this framework, Solidus hides both transaction values and the transaction
graph (i.e., the identities of transacting entities) while maintaining
the public verifiability that makes blockchains so appealing.

To achieve strong confidentiality of this kind, we introduce the
concept of '''a Publicly-Verifiable Oblivious RAM Machine''' (PVORM).
We present a set of formal security definitions for both PVORM
and Solidus and show that our constructions are secure. Finally, we
implement Solidus and present a set of benchmarks indicating that
the system is efficient in practice"
(https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/317.pdf)

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]