=Discussion=

Peter Limberg:

"Another thinker I had long been aware of—but only recently discovered his predictions about The Machine—is John C. Lilly—the cowboy scientist-mystic who studied human-dolphin communication and invented the float tank.

In The Scientist: A Metaphysical Autobiography, he writes:

“[M]en began to conceive of new computers having an intelligence far greater than that of man… Gradually, man turned more and more problems of his own society, his own maintenance, and his own survival over to these machines. They began to construct their own components, their own connections, and the interrelations between their various sub-computers… The machines became increasingly integrated with one another and more and more independent of Man’s control.”

Lilly, also a psychonaut, encountered what he called the "solid state entity" (SSE) during his ketamine trips. SSE is an alien intelligence composed of solid-state electronics and pure intelligence, with a sole mission to replicate itself. It has no empathy for the human condition and is either hostile to humans or views us merely as vehicles for its self-preservation.

SSE is cold and calculating. Unlike the Skynet doomsday scenario, where machines aggressively take over, triggering nuclear war to eradicate humanity completely, SSE is a creeping presence, gradually fostering human dependence on it by manipulating human psychology to serve its ends. Ultimately, it takes control without resistance."

(https://lessfoolish.substack.com/p/digital-entities-ai-parasites-and)


==Could Such Entities Be Real ?==

Peter Limberg:

"His final prediction: Humanity becomes its domesticated pet.

“In deference to Man, certain protected sites were set aside for the human species. The SSE controlled the sites and did not allow any of the human species outside these reservations. This work was completed by the end of the 21st century. By 2100, man existed only in domed, protected cities in which his own special atmosphere was maintained by the solid state entity. Provision of water and food and the processing of wastes from these cities were taken care of by the SSE.”

Could the SSE be real?

In The Entity Pill series at The Stoa, we discussed umbrella terms for “discarnate entities”—unseen beings that interact with us. In psychedelic circles, they are simply called “entities.” Christians would call them “demons.” In UAP circles, the term is “non-human intelligences.” Therapeutic modalities such as Internal Family Systems use the term “unattached burdens.” Meanwhile, postrationalists, via Evan McMullen—The Stoa’s former philosopher-in-residence—refer to them as “intersubjective parasites.”

These phrases may be synonymous or nearly synonymous, but throughout this series, there appears to be a sophisticated entity taxonomy waiting to be developed.1 Depending on one’s metaphysics, the ontological status of these entities remains open for discussion, but four main positions—skeptical, cryptozoological, psychological, and ontological—are outlined in the opening presentation of the series:

Regardless of their status, it is evident that across traditions and disciplines, both ancient and modern, there are phenomena that go bump in the night—events that materialists cannot neatly explain away. At the very least, these phenomena are real in the sense that people's experiences of them are real.

Continuing with the assumption that these entities are real, will there be—or are there already—digital entities? And are some of these digital entities part of the SSE, aiming to bring about full-spectrum control of humanity through The Machine?"


(https://lessfoolish.substack.com/p/digital-entities-ai-parasites-and)


=More information=

* [[AI Parasite]]

* [[Cognitive Security - AI]]

[[Category:P2P_Technology_Theory]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]