
Blog URL = https://krisu.noblogs.org/

==Description==

"A few minutes ago, the Solidarity University (kritische und solidarische
Universität = KriSU) was founded in Vienna, Austria. KriSU-activists
revitalized rooms which are vacant since 2 years for the public. KriSU
reacts on the fundamental social, ecological and economic crisis of
capitalist society. It sees itself as a part of the global university
protests. Elfriede Jelinek, famous Austrian writer, declared her
solidarity: „I am glad to support this action, since I would support any
critical initiative weakening those encrusted university structures.“

An international wave of solidarity has been carrying KriSU since its
start had been announced. Paul Singer, secretary of state for solidarity
economy in the labour ministry of Brazil stated: „This is the first
project of a real democratic, open and solidaric university. I hope, that
it will thrive and become an example for a new paradigm of education in a
more equal society.“ Anup Dash, professor of sociology at the university
of Utkal, India says: "I should first of all congratulate you on this
wonderful and much needed initiative, and I am sure it will soon build up
the philosophical and social foundations for an alternative knowledge
system to support the great transformation of the global social order that
we are all working in different ways to realise."

KriSU is working for a solidarity economy to overcome poverty and
existential fears. It is open to everybody willing to produce and share
knowledge in a self-managed and cooperative way, not requiring formal
education degrees. „A solidarity university must not support economic
growth as and in itself and competition, but has to make wealth available
for everybody“ emphasize activists. One of them working for an
agricultural research organisation in Austria states: „Time is ripe for
public discussion of the responsibility of universities for the disastrous
ecologic and societal conditions and for drawing consequences.“

The principles of KriSu are (1) a lively connection between research,
education and practical activities, (2) self-management, feminism,
anti-racism and engagement against anti-semitism and islamophobia, (3)
non-commercial character, (4) independence from the state, (5) education
for solidarity economy and a solidarity economy of education by means of
research, mediation and development of self-managed, community-oriented and
cooperative ways of production.

The rapidly growing list of supporters contains already more than 270
individuals from different spheres of society, both from Austria and
abroad, among them members of workers councils, trade unionists, academics,
politicians, students, migrants, artists and retired people such as Prof.
Frigga Haug, Jean Ziegler, Lisbeth N. Trallori, Robert Menasse, Prof.
Birgit Sauer, Robert Misik, Lieselotte Wohlgenannt, Erich Hackl, Maria
Vassilakou und Prof. Norbert Dimmel. A dense program with well-known
artists, speakers and scientists is starting immediately."
(http://www.populareconomics.org/ussen/node/146)

==More Information==
* [[Solidarity Economics]]
* [[Solidarity Economy]]

[[Category:Education]]