

'''= Brazilian Free Software cooperative, with about 40 collaborators in June 2008'''

URL = http://www.solis.coop.br

=Description=

"born from Univates' IT department is a cooperative called SOLIS (www.solis.coop.br), officially inaugurated on May 12, 2003. 

SOLIS works toward regional development by finding ways of empowering local businesses through the use of free software. By doing this, people at SOLIS hope these businesses can become more competitive, profitable and able to grow and hire more people. 

Right now SOLIS is working with industrial and commercial associations, helping the companies associated with them fine-tune their needs in order to save money by sharing among them the costs of software development, customization and training. Univates and SOLIS wish to prove in a practical way that free software can help regional development and is good business that—most importantly—respects people's free access to knowledge. We hope other universities can set up similar arrangements in their own regions. 

Cesar Brod (cesar@brod.com.br) first became involved with the GNU/Linux operating system in 1993. He now is the IT manager and coordinates software development for Univates. Cesar also is the Vice President of SOLIS and the coordinator of the international section of the Latin America Free Software Conference (www.softwarelivre.pti.org.br), which will be in November 2004, in the beautiful setting of the Iguassa Falls, among Paraguay, Argentina and Brazil."
(http://www.linuxjournal.com/article/7081)


=More Information=

#Other [[Free Software Cooperatives]]


[[Category:Companies]]