== Characteristics ==

[[Matthew Slater]] (2014):

“The failure of state-level economic policy is driving the emergence of many independent 'solidarity economy' networks accross the world. While the old story says that resources are short and the fittest will survive, these movements are forging a new story about creating local abundance together. 

As well as creating a new culture, a new spirituality , they are learning how to

* feed themselves from their gardens better than supermarkets
* maximise exchange between themselves (and each other) to keep the value local
* finance sustainable enterprises,
* pool risk
* use underemployed people to enhance collective life.

While seeking similar objectives though, these movements are largely separated by geography, language and class. Each struggles with software issues as if their needs were unique. But I believe they could be working more closely together and achieving more with less.”

== Directory ==

[[Matthew Slater]]:

[[Transition Network]] [https://www.transitionnetwork.org/] is an umbrella for hundreds of independent transition towns. Software resources are channeled to supporting the centre rather than the edges and to strengthening internal information flows. All is in the popular hardcore open framework Drupal. Their incubator, Reconomy, is incubating some isolated prototype projects, but I have seen no notion of building an economic infrastructure.

[[Global Ecovillage Network]] ([http://ecovillage.org/ GEN]) is a larger system with a broader mandate. A policy decision to use Drupal has not paid off because ambition has been greater than volunteer capacity. Even so the new GEN sites tool offers a localised integrated Ecovillage database, project management and social networking system potentially very useful. As the inter-village economy becomes a priority, there will be deep questions about whether to pile complexity on complexity in Drupal or whether to create a new trading network that any community can join.

The LETS movement is very localised with little national or international coordination. My org, Community Forge hosts over 100 active, mostly French-speaking LETS systems for free using a Drupal Distro. They need a marketplace, an accounting system and simple social networking tools, Meanwhile the largest such network in the world, Community Exchange Systems (CES) is also migrating to Drupal and plans to implement an intertrading protocol which will allow CES, Cforge and other networks to account for value exchange between them, forming a global private open source exchange network.

The timebanking movement started in USA, but has national organisations elsewhere and grass roots initiatives in many countries. The software needs to support one or many communities not much different to LETS but more centralised / top down / moderated. Software policy has been chaotic as the TBUSA platform Community Weaver II (Drupal) was badly managed and hOurworld started providing a superior, free alternative custom php application eventually winning all UK. Meanwhile Israel developed their own and Australia partnered with CES (see above) and TBUSA will shortly release Community Weaver III. Soon there will be 4 semi-pro packages which don't talk to each other. Is this the shape of the solidarity economy? See my 10 min talk to Timebanks USA about that.

The [[Catalunia Integral Cooperative]] (CIC) is a network of local cooperatives. Since the 15M movement pre-occupied the plazas of Spain, CIC has been building the solidarity economy, including experimenting with currencies. I know of an abortive attempt to build a social network and now they are about to deploy their own emulation of CES. From this there is a new project, the Fair Coop which looks like an attempt to do the same thing globally, with intellectual support of P2PFoundation. This year they launched cryptocurrency Faircoin, and other monetary initiatives are planned. Software is far from the only priority, and aspirations are far greater than resources.

One final initiative I want to show you is the [[Mutual Aid Network]] ([http://www.mutualaidnetwork.org/ MAN]) from USA. The intention is to provide a much more rounded economic system than existing timebanks, to support communities to create and share wealth, and govern themselves using existing legal structures. (Full disclosure: I'm their software strategist). With no resources so far, they have built a content sharing tool, but they really need something much more comprehensive."

— https://matslats.net/solidarity-economy-software-1

Since 2014 some protocols are emerging as useful.

== Marketplaces ==
The number of attempts to build a decentralised marketplace proliferates. We note here:
* [https://murmurations.network Murmurations] is a metaprotocol for indexing, aggregating and filtering content of definable types from sites which support that protocol.
* Vinay Gupta's Mattereum registers objects on a blockchain so as to easily transfer their ownership.
Plus numerous efforts which are tightly bound to cryptocurrencies.

== Accounting ==
[[Credit Commons Protocol]] defines how entities can do mutual credit accounting between themselves.
There are many competing blockchain interoperability protocols allowing tokens to virtually jump between chains.
There have been several implementations of [Ripple mesh accounting] (Ripple) including:
* [https://ripple.com Ripple.com]
* [https://www.offsetcredit.org/ Offset credit]
* [https://mychips.org/ myChips]
* [https://trustlines.network Trustlines]
* and others

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:P2P_Accounting]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:P2P_Market_Approaches]]
[[Category:Solidarity_Economy]]