
A very good reminder of some key arguments by IFLA.

URL = http://www.ifla.org/documents/infopol/copyright/ipmyths.htm


=Text=

"Intellectual property is a hot-button issue these days, and for good
reason. In the heat of debate, however, it can become easy for
dogmatic assertions to stamp out complex truths. In order to fairly
consider intellectual property, it is important that our discussions
not be clouded by misconceptions; for this reason, a number of false
statements about intellectual property are here listed and rebutted.


'''Intellectual property is an ancient principle.'''

Not true. Intellectual property is an explicitly modern notion, having
made its debut quite recently. The first patent law was enacted in
1623, and the precursor of modern copyright - the Statute of Anne -
came into being in 1710. These early laws were limited in scope and
restricted to only a few types of information; the broader
interperatation of these principles used today in the western world is
quite modern, certain elements having been added only within the last
few years.


'''Intellectual property is recognized worldwide.'''

As the US's recent standoff with China demonstrates, intellectual
property is not a concept which has worldwide acceptance. Indeed, a
major foreign policy objective of the United States has been to force
other nations to comply with its own intellectual property agenda - an
unwelcome form of intellectual imperialism which is all too frequently
ignored by watchdog groups.


'''Without intellectual property, no one will produce original work.'''

Given that intellectual property law made its debut in 1623, we may
correctly consider any work produced before this time to dispell the
myth. Man created for millenia before the advent of intellectual
property; he will create for many more millenia after it is abandoned.


'''Intellectual property is necessary to create incentives for the production of original works.'''

This intellectual property myth has become the mantra of IP
supporters. Often repeated, never questioned, the idea that creativity
depends on a government granted monopoly needs no justification in the
minds of most IP boosters. Sadly, however, they are mistaken:
intellectual property "rights" are not essential to creation, and in
some circumstances even deter it. Consider, for instance, the software
industry. Free for years from the limitations of intellectual
property, the industry flourished, becoming by all accounts one of the
most creative of environments in the modern world. With the recent
introduction of patent law into computing, however, many individual
programmers live in fear of lawsuits from large corporations who claim
"ownership" of techniques such as the scroll-buffer. Who benefits from
this? Certainly not the creator! Intellectual property law, from its
inception, has been about publishers and other powerful firms as much
as it has been about creative individuals; the latter often find their
interests poorly defended by IP.

'''Even if people DID create works without intellectual property protections, the quality of these works would be substandard.'''

Only if "Julius Caesar", Plutarch's "Lives", "The Last Supper", and
Handel's "Messiah" are "substandard"! All of these, including such
pivotal creations as the Bible, the Koran, and the hundreds of Sutras
were created in a world without intellectual property. IP boosters
claim that weakening intellectual property law means giving up great
literature, music, and art; in fact, history shows us that this is not
the case.


'''The "best" creators won't work without intellectual property protections.'''

Once again, history proves this to be false. Shakespeare, Plato,
Confucius, Hero, Chaucer, Handel, and many others of the finest names
in world literature, music, art, and invention worked in an
environment free of intellectual property restrictions. Clearly,
genius does not require copyright to produce!

'''To take away intellectual property rights is to deny creators the right to profit from their labors.'''

This myth is based on the idea that the only way to make money off of
creation is to "sell" the ideas which are produced. In fact, this is
not true. Consulting, support, performance, service: these are all
ways in which creators can make money off of their abilities without
appealing to intellectual property rights. Even if there were no
copyright, a band could still make money by charging for live
performances, for instance; an even better example is found in
academia, where a great deal of idea production takes place without
the ideas being "sold" to the universities which sponsor their
creators. Removing intellectual property rights would not deny
creators the right to profit from their labors; it would, however,
allow all of society to share in the benefits of their work.


'''Intellectual property follows directly from the notion of physical property.'''

Physical property rights are derived from the basic fact that a
physical object can't be in two places at once. In order to keep
people from squabbling over material objects, we use a system of
rights to say "who gets what". Information, however, differs from
physical property in a number of ways, one of which being that it can
be in many places at the same time. Let's say that Fred gives Barney
an apple; after this, Fred no longer has the apple. If, on the other
hand, Fred TELLS Barney about the apple, Fred STILL knows about the
apple. Fred gave the information to Barney, but Fred still has it!
Clearly, then, there is no need for Fred and Barney to squabble over
who "owns" the information about the apple: to do such would be to try
to treat information like an object, an idea which is clearly flawed.

As the debate of over the future of intellectual property unfolds, it
will be more important than ever for participants, and bystanders, to
have good information concerning the nature of IP. By removing the
myths and misconceptions which surround intellectual property, we can
make better decisions as to its proper status in our society.


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Policy]]