* Article: Rethinking Enclosure: Space, Subjectivity and the Commons. Alex Jeffrey, Colin McFarlane, et al.


=Abstract=

"While concepts of “enclosure” and the “commons” are becoming
increasingly popular in critical geography, there have been few attempts to think them
together. This paper sets out a dialectic of enclosure–commons as a means for thinking
through contemporary processes of exclusion, violence and alterity. We examine what is
at stake through a geographical reading of enclosure, that is, the processes through which
neoliberalism works through—and summons into existence—certain forms of spatiality
and subjectivity. In doing so we confront the spatialities of enclosure’s “other”: strategies
and practices of commoning which assemble more inclusive, just and sustainable spaces.
We examine the materiality of enclosure across a range of sites, from processes of walling
to a more substantial assessment of the diverse assemblage of materials and subjectivities
drawn into modalities of enclosure. We go on to explore the inscription of enclosure on the
human body through an examination of, first, law, and second, biopolitics. In conclusion,
we explore the implications of this argument for critical geographical scholarship."


=Excerpts=


'''1.'''

"Our project is motivated by a desire to expose and
counter the materialisations of enclosure. We are interested in how the seizure of
the commons is actively assembled through porous, sociomaterial and distanciated
forms of enclosure—through relations of stability and flux, fixity and movement.
In doing so, we are equally concerned with how we might think enclosure’s other:
strategies and practices of commoning that do not necessarily avoid walling, but
which assemble more inclusive, just and sustainable spaces. While recent years have
seen an increase in debates on both enclosure and the commons in Geography and
critical social science more generally, there have been few attempts to think them
together.

...

  
The paper sets out three approaches to the dialectic of enclosure–commons that
draw upon our respective research projects, and which we believe are particularly
important in the current moment: materiality, law and biopolitics."


'''2.'''


"As Graham and Marvin (2001) argue in their seminal
Splintering Urbanism, global neoliberalism has served to intensify the fragmentation
of the urban landscape as new privatised, secessionary enclaves of infrastructure and
services splinter from the city and, in the process, sever any contemporary possibility
of modern, uniformly networked urbanism."


==Insurgent Citizenship, the Law, and the Production of Enclosure vs. the Commons==

"In order to understand law’s ambiguous position within the production of both
enclosure and the commons, we need to explore the relationship between law
and the practice of citizenship. The first step in this project requires detaching
notions of citizenship from their historic connection with the nation-state. There
is a wealth of literature that challenges Marshall’s (1992) teleological view of
citizenship as an evolving set of political, civic and social rights unfolding within
the territory of the nation-state (Painter and Jeffrey 2009). As Ong (2007:6) argues,
there has been a disarticulation and rearticulation of the elements that constitute
citizenship—rights, entitlements, territoriality, a nation—through neoliberalism.

Thus there are those mobile individuals who possess human capital and expertise
who are able to “exercise citizenship like claims in diverse locations” (Ong 2007:7).

However, there are those who do not possess such “tradable competence”
who are consequently vulnerable to “exclusionary practices” (Ong 2007:7). This
new landscape of disarticulated citizenship poses three questions: first, how do
conventional understandings of citizenship persist despite the fragmentation of
rights claims and affiliations that are orientated beyond (or within) the boundaries of
particular states? Second, how are these forms of citizenship reconstituted through
processes of enclosure? And, third, to what extent is a new form of insurgent
citizenship commensurate with alterity and resistance?
   
The answer to the first question provides the groundwork for an answer to the
second and third. The presentation of citizenship as a form of legal membership
to a specific state relies on a particular configuration of power and knowledge that
privileges the state as the primary locus of authority. This assumption reflects the
wider territorial-trap in legal geographies. There is symmetry at work here: just
as law is presented as an abstract universal, so citizenship appears as a technical
condition of affiliation to a particular territorial and bureaucratic unit: the nation-
state. But the act of bundling citizenship into the state is neither innocent nor
incidental, since it recasts the practice of discerning insiders and outsiders as a
product of the territorial arrangement of states, and therefore somehow beyond
politics. This image of citizenship is coherent with the broader presentation of
neoliberal governmentality as a technical, as opposed to political or ideological,
practice. It is this imaginary that allows the presentation of citizenship tests or
metrics of desirability as technical solutions to the “problem” of identifying who
constitutes a legitimate citizen.
   
Countering these narratives, Engin Isin (2002) has produced a genealogy of
citizenship that elevates the outsider, the stranger and the alien as formative
figures in the production of notions of citizenship. This work moves away from
an instrumental account of how citizenship rights are conferred, to pay attention
instead to the governmental role of producing citizenship knowledge, arguing
“dominant views on citizenship derive not from those who questioned and
attempted to overturn its values, but from those who were its benefactors and
inheritors” (Isin 2002:276).

   
Therefore the power of conventional understandings of citizenship has been their
ability to present an abstract and highly politicised idea (the constitution of “us”
and “them”) as a simple apparatus of state membership. In order to unsettle
this view of citizenship scholars have examined the production of differentiated
forms of citizenship under conditions of neoliberalism. This approach has involved
developing alternative rubrics of citizenship that illustrate the qualitative differences
between different claims to rights or solidarity. Miraftab and Wills (2007) provide
a useful exploration of the power of labelling such new styles of citizenship. The
authors examine the effects of the privatisation of water and electricity services on
the urban poor in Cape Town, South Africa. Examining the practices of the Western
Cape Anti-Eviction Campaign, they focus in particular on what they term “insurgent
citizenship”, political practices that seek to destabilise the unjust outcomes of the
privatisation of utilities through direct action (re-connecting water and electricity),
protests (in the streets and outside government buildings) and physically halting
the eviction of residents (blocking the path of the police). 


They explain:
   
- As neoliberal practices privatise the city, its infrastructure, and its life spaces, and
increasingly exclude urban citizens who are not deemed “good-paying customers”,
insurgent citizenship challenges the hypocrisy of neoliberalism: an ideology that claims
to equalize through the promotion of formal political and civil rights yet, through its
privatisation of life spaces, criminalises citizens on the basis of their consumption abilities  (Miraftab and Wills 2007:202).


There are two observations that stem from Miraftab and Wills’s work. The first,
and perhaps most evidently, the processes of enclosure outlined through the
privatisation of public services are themselves provoking new styles of citizenship
participation and new claims to rights. Here we see a vivid articulation of the
dialectic between enclosure and the commons, where these two phenomena are
not separate parallel entities but entangled socio-political practices that are dynamic
and unfolding.
   
The second—and interlinked—observation relates to the shifting locus of
citizenship and law in the practices of insurgency outlined by Miraftab and Wills. It
would be simplistic to argue that insurgent citizenship looks merely beyond the state
as the primary locus of rights, embracing instead more cosmopolitan impulses of
social justice and human rights. This would suggest a clean delineation between
state-based and insurgent practices of citizenship. Rather, insurgent citizenship
flexibly appropriates aspects of state citizenship while denying or resisting others. At
the heart of this dynamic is the flexible and arbitrary nature of law within practices
of enclosure (see Roy 2009). We are particularly drawn to the work of James Holston
(2008) and his illustration of the differentiated legal processes within planning and
construction in urban Brazil. 


For Holston the use of law requires grounding in specific
social and spatial practices of exclusion, which involve the subversion of mainstream
understandings of the universal and immutable character of law:

- Far from “having no law” or a law that “doesn’t work,” as one frequently hears from
Brazilians and foreigners alike . . . elites have used the law brilliantly—particularly land law—to sustain conflicts and illegalities in their favor, force disputes into extralegal
resolution where other forms of power triumph, maintain their privilege and immunity,
and deny most Brazilians access to basic social and economic resources (Holston 2008:19).


Holston, a key source for Miraftab and Wills, also evokes a language of “insurgency”,
drawing attention to practices of auto-construction of housing on the periphery
of S ̃o Paulo. This account illustrates how citizens illicitly appropriated land and
then subsequently attempted to formalise these appropriations through legal
recognition, a process that Holston (2008:25) describes as “legalising the illegal”.

In certain cases the courts performed redress and granted legal ownership rights
to the inhabitants of auto-constructed houses. However, in drawing attention to
the opportunities posed for legal redress, Holston simultaneously examines the
barriers posed by the institutions and practices of the Brazilian legal system. This
work highlights law as a social process, rather than an abstract universal norm that
functions in a mechanistic and egalitarian fashion. Holston’s arresting account of
the slow and crisis-ridden attempts by residents of the Jardim das Camelias district
to establish legal recognition for houses they had formerly purchased from what
was later declared to be an illegitimate vendor draws attention to the arbitrary way
in which certain cases meet with success. The socialised nature of law is evident
in both the different ways in which members of the Brazilian judiciary handled the
cases and the influence of wider practices of protest (outside the space of the court
room and frequently in the media) on the outcome of the cases. This account of
legal struggle, coupled with that of Miraftab and Wills, allows us to draw out two
aspects of enclosure’s subject.
   
The first is that law represents a contradictory resource for forms of resistance to
enclosure. While legal redress may challenge particular elite-driven neoliberalising
strategies, legal settlements can lend legitimacy to the wider spatial practices under
legal scrutiny. In Holston’s case this led to the dispossession of residents of urban
peripheries who had been duped into purchasing “illegal” land deeds, only to have
these removed by the court decades later. 



=More Information=

#To be published by Antipode, copy via co-author alexander.vasudevan@nottingham.ac.uk
#Cited: The [[City and the Grassroots]]. Manuel Castells, 1983

See also:

* Graham S and Marvin S (2001) Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities and the Urban Condition. London: Routledge



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]