
=The Tool=

= part of the [[ECSA Stack]] toolbox of the [[Economic Space Agency]], meant to enable a fair disintermediated economy using tokens/cryptocurrencies:

==Description==

"What is Space? Space is '''a pattern language for programmable economy''' (implemented first as a set of open source models on Rholang). It facilitates the expression, design and utilization of tokens, offers and business logics, covering the economic interactions as we know them, while opening a vast field of possibilities beyond their scope.

The limitation addressed by Space? There is currently no existing structure that would allow for the expression and execution of fully-fledged economic logic. The concerns of cryptoeconomics have so far concentrated on the utilization of tokens as currencies. While the programmatization of this limited area has already brought about significant expansion of our economic possibilities, a fully featured, networked economy and its financial instrumentation would require a more comprehensive range of approaches. The current solution proposed towards such requirements, smart contracts, currently operate as black boxes, unstandardized to the economy as a whole, barring a vast range interoperations from its expressive range.

The solution space offers. In contrast, Space provides the models for programming economy in all of its areas in a fully interoperative manner. 


Through Space:

* All data becomes tokenizable. It can be distributed as value, right or combination of both (covering equity instruments such as stocks). It can also designate its own distribution logic.
* All interactions gain the capabilities of economic offers. These capabilities are considerably expanded from the range of offers as we know them, fully utilizing their programmability.
* Every relation (agreed, persistent interaction between any partners) can employ an extended organizational palette: a programmed business logic can by itself function like a corporation, contracting its payments and governance to the logic itself.

Space's goal is to provide a general architecture for programmable, networked economy. Through this architecture, tokens can concentrate on distribution, while programmable offers can form flexible economic interfaces for the tokens and their users. And because all existing relations within Space can be designated with rights and capabilities, its architecture is inherently organizational. Its users, whether individuals or organizations within Space, are able to control their existing economic relations or establish new ones.


The choice of Rholang as its implementation endows Space with two key benefits:

* Compatibility with RChain, next generation blockchain, providing an infrastructure for Space's functionality and security (this does not limit Space to RChain, other implementations are possible).
* Programs in Rholang can function as their own proof. Space inherits this property, resulting in economic forms that are auditable by default, offering full knowledge of their operative range.

In sum, Space establishes a programmable basis for the economy as a whole. Through it, units of value, business logic and their organization as economy becomes programmable and secure, with an unforgeable history of its operations.

Space  is an Economic Space Agency project."
(https://docs.google.com/document/d/11vw20GZUmXmn7EBoUYLR8QigzU9cZKMMtEyw_l8u5mU/edit)

=The Generic Concept=

See: [[From Vertical Spatiality to Horizontal Spatiality]]


[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]