
=Discussion=

(in the context of its relation to the Blockchain)

Sasha Shilina:

"As for Quentin Meillassoux’s philosophy named speculative materialism (2008), again it centers around the concept of “correlationism,” which refers to the idea that humans can only access reality through their subjective experiences and cannot know things as they are in themselves, independent of human perception. Meillassoux challenges correlationism by arguing for the existence of an absolute reality that is independent of human thought or observation.

When examining blockchain in relation to Meillassoux’s philosophy, one might consider how blockchain could potentially provide a mechanism for accessing objective information and establishing trust without relying on subjective human intermediaries. Blockchain allows for the creation of a shared and tamper-proof database that can be accessed by multiple parties without the need for a central authority. One could argue that blockchain, by providing a verifiable and auditable record of transactions and events, introduces a certain objectivity into certain domains. The decentralized nature of blockchain ensures that no single entity has complete control over the data, thereby reducing the influence of subjective biases or manipulation.

Furthermore, blockchain’s use of cryptographic techniques ensures the integrity and immutability of the recorded information. This aspect aligns with Meillassoux’s emphasis on contingency. Once a transaction or data entry is recorded on the blockchain, it becomes resistant to alteration or erasure, reinforcing the notion of objective reality.

Moreover, Quentin Meillassoux showed his interest in encryption in his book “The Number and the Siren: A Reading of Mallarmé’s Throw the Bones” (2011). Quentin Meillassoux’s main task here was to identify the encryption procedure in this work of the French poet, search for the code number and try to explain its meaning. Based on the thesis that a certain number is indeed encrypted in the poem, and that knowledge of this number is necessary for a correct understanding of the entire poem, Meillassoux makes a thorough analysis of the work itself and a comparative analysis with other significant works of the author in order to find the principle of the code, and then justify it."

(https://medium.com/paradigm-research/chain-of-thought-exploring-blockchain-through-the-lens-of-philosophy-5c81198312bd)


[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]