'''= a platform for building your own USB-based chording keyboard'''

URL = http://symlink.dk/projects/spiffchorder/

Status updates via http://open-innovation-projects.org/projects/show/57/spiffchorder



=Description=

"SpiffChorder is a Chording Keyboard experiment, which means that it is meant as a platform for building your own USB-based chording keyboard, and customizing it any way you like, both in terms of the chord maps, and other functions, including pointing devices etc.

In order for this experiment to be beneficial, it is of course released as Open Source (which is also required by the ObDev AVR-USB license).

With the experimental status, there are certainly many things that are not fully done yet. We have a list of bugs, which are being eliminated one by one, when we have the time. Also, there are plans for more features in the near future. If you need it faster than that, please contribute. But in order to give a better view of the current state of the SpiffChorder project, I think Greg will testify that it is stable (at least stable enough for him to use it about every day). Also, a few other people are building SpiffChorders.

There is no doubt the information regarding this project changes over time. In order to better track these changes, and to have a better way of collaborating on this project, Greg has set up a Wiki for SpiffChorder, where you will likely find more up-to-date information. In any case, I will try to update this page occationally, and my aim with this page is to include a description of the project, and how I got involved.

A chording keyboard or chorder is a keyboard, on which you press multiple keys at the same time, forming chords that are translated into characters. Basically you can use just one hand to type on a chording keyboard, but because of symmetry it is supposedly easy to learn to use the other hand once you have learned using one. Then you can use a chorder in each hand, and you can alternate your typing, one letter with each hand, regardless of what letters you need to type (since any character can be typed with either hand)."



[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Music]]