
=Discussion=

Eric Hunting:

"We've been talking about the creation of an exhibition that demonstrates a neo-nomadic or urban nomadic lifestyle through the creation of a mobile/portable indoor eco-village. This is a re-imagining of the idea of Urban Nomadism in the Information Age context; an emergent mobile community exploring the new lifestyle options created by the physical lightening of needs thanks to information technology and the transition toward a standard of living defined increasingly by digital goods and services. Dante has coined the term for this as a Spimed Nomad Aggregator. The idea is of a persistent, if always changing and frequently moving, center or nexus of neo-nomadic community that appropriates and repurposes found spaces, such as abandoned warehouses and office buildings, or gathers under common 'skybreaks' of various kinds such as tension structures using portable elements which I've termed 'furnitecture', deriving from Ken Isaac's '60s era concept of Living Structures. There is demountable/deployable open structure furnitecture more akin to the original Living Structures and 'pod furnitecture' akin to recent pod cabin designs, which are more enclosed self-contained unit designs often put on wheels or casters for immediate mobility. These would be used to create the basic functional elements of the village; cabin pods, workstation pods, kitchen pods, gardening pods, energy pods, and so on.

The Spime concept comes in as a way of adding a sort of digital glue binding the elements of the village and community into coherence. Each of the designed elements of the indoor village have associated spimes created to track their use and evolution and are appropriately tagged for feedback to their individual semantic webs. This allows for digital dissemination of these open designs and global participation in their production, use, and refinement. These, in turn, are gathered into a semantic web for the village as a whole which thus exists as an on-line data construct as well as a frequently changing and/or moving physical structure. This may extend to include semantic webs for the individual nomads themselves in the manner of a Netention web. This facilitates a collective digital learning capability and intelligence for the nomadic community and allows numerous aggregators to potentially function as a mutually supported collective despite distance and location.

The Spimed Nomad Aggregator is both an exploration of novel light lifestyle and an expression of the futurist concept of 'outquisition', the members of the new nomadic community commonly Makers, artists, and activists whose travel is motivated by a compulsion toward intervention. These villages would potentially serve as Festivalist gatherings, relief or outreach facilities, and incubators or 'ashrams' of Post-Industrial and eco-technology and culture in communities effected by the progressive failures of Industrial Age economics."

=Links=

http://sharewiki.org/en/Spime_Housing


[[Category:Urbanism]]