
=Discussion=

Johannes Heinrichs:

'''Reflection levels as fundamental law of the social system and the misunderstood truth of caste system'''

“Most important of all, the individualistic age of Europe has in its discovery of the
individual fixed among the idea-forces of the future two of a master potency which
cannot be entirely eliminated by any temporary reaction. The first of these, now
universally accepted, is the democratic conception of the right of all members of the
society to the full life and the full development of which they are individually capable.”
(Sri Aurobindo, The Human Cycle, p. 24)

It happens rarely, if at all, that the organisation of our societies is dealt with as a
general philosophical issue, or as one of fundamental and spiritual importance.
“Political philosophy” seems a mere application, not a basic dimension of philosophy.
This is due to the fact that most traditional philosophies are monologist in their
departure. 


But if the inter-personal relation, the dialogue with other persons, is
constitutive for a subject, as shown in chapter 1, there results a dialogical thinking
which is expressed in the famous sentences of Ludwig Feuerbach (1804-1872), pupil
of Hegel:

''- “True dialectic is not the monologue of thinker with himself, but the dialogue between I and You.”- "The first
object of man is man himself. The sense of nature (...) is a comparably future product. The other person is the
bond between me and the world. I am and feel myself depending on the world, because I first feel myself
dependent on other humans."''

In relation to the other persons, the reflection, which is so constitutive for selfconsciousness, reaches a totally different dimension: 
The interpersonal reflection becomes practical - that means changing the interpersonal relations and changing
the persons themselves. 


'''There are [[Four Levels of Interpersonal Reflection]]:'''

1. Instrumental action with reference to the other (and handling of the other), e.g.
treatment by a doctor or pre-personal business, where the other is only seen
in the context of things or money.

2. Strategic action takes into account the actions of the other for one`s own
interests.

3. Communicative action responds to the expectations and desires of the other,
not just with strategic intent, the track of self-interest (2), but for the other`s
own sake; called also "altruistic" (derived from "alter, the other"). This
communicative approach does not mean a particular altruistic attitude, but that
it is nothing without successful communication. The respective subjective
attitudes and acts are elements of communication, which enter into this and
are subsequently diverted from this. It is for example possible that a partner
wants to stay in communication, and the other does not, or that the current
communication ceases. Then only the individual´s more or less "altruistic" or
strategic attitudes remain. Successful communication goes beyond any
subjective attitudes!

4. Meta-communicative actions or attitudes respond to the requirements and
standards of social coexistence; these standards are mutually recognised,
partly put into question, in any case, and are more or less regulated anew.
The → social action was "classically" defined by Max Weber as an “orientation on the
actions of others.”



If we think this orientation as practical reflection with the above
leveling, the decisive structural constant is revealed: the four levels of social action.

The reflection levels shown above are the predominant components of social action.
On the meta-communicative level, the interpersonal relation becomes a social
system, dynamic and self-regulating. Systemic thinking means then that the relations
are no longer seen from the view-point of the individual actors, but from “above,” from
the community as such. And now, we look at the same levels of personal
interaction as system-levels of a big community, as that of a state, and find
differentiations which we all know – but normally without systemic understanding:

The four great levels of any society are called subsystems. They are nothing else
than the reflection-levels we know already from the direct interpersonal relation.

The second division (subdivision) is given for understanding the method of fractal
division, and for illustrating the richness of the subsystems. Here you find the sixteen
areas of human and social activity which in a sense of social ethics will be further
explained in chapter 9.

On the political level 2 we could also insert (as is done in the book) the formal
distinctions of the so-called political powers, traditionally legislative, executive, and
judiciary power. Within the executive power we must distinguish, for logical as well as
for practical reasons, the kind of executive, which has only to apply the existing laws,
which is the administration (e.g. police, financial offices etc.), from the executive,
which has the task and power to act and to decide for the community, which is the
government. So we have not three but four powers or functions of the state in this
logical succession: administrative (objective application), governmental (subjective
power), legislative (intersubjective, communicative consulting), and judiciary (metacommunicative control).
We will see in the following that this division of powers must be applied on each
system level. Therefore it is already put at the right of the house, in the graphic.
This is the first theory of social systems which is directly derived from the nature of
the individual and the interpersonal relations! There can be no other satisfying social
system theory.

Now let us briefly draw the conclusions for an [[Integral Theory of Democracy]].

1. In our existing democracies the whole system is governed from below,
from the economic sphere and from a “capitalist” money system, which is quite
dubious. Even if religion or serves as ideology of justification or diversion, the
human basic values are not really leading the whole of society. And even if
the money-system was in order, the governing of the system from below
(“money rules the world”) basically cannot be accepted. Everybody knows
that, but nobody knows how to change it – except many fanatics of another
money-system. Even if they are right in their economic field, they are very
wrong from an integral point of view. The whole of a society cannot be
changed from the economic field alone! To try that means to repeat the
historical mistakes of Marxists as well as of liberals and neo-liberals.

2. In our existing democracies around the world, the political parties are
decisive. These parties bundle all problems (basic values of culture, foreign
issues, inner politics, and the economy) and are chosen by their electors for all
this – that means for nothing.

Apart from many other weaknesses of the parliamentary system these seem to be
the most general and crucial ones. Now, the remedy of these weaknesses is not at
all the abolishment (or a further weakening) of parliament (e.g. by direct democracy
of plebiscites, which is either only an ornamental addition or totally inept for a big
state), but on the very contrary, the further development and inner synthesis of direct
and parliamentary democracy.


Let us briefly come to serious solutions which follow logically and rather simply from
the above system analysis.

Ad 1: Governing from above, from the basic values instead of from below is possible
by the differentiation of the parliament according to the system levels. That means
four chambers of the parliaments with a hierarchical legislation-power.

Ad 2: The representatives must be elected for each chamber independently. In
this way, the elections become at the same time matter-decisions. The parties
(federations of candidates with the same aims) become matter-specific parties
instead of power-parties which claim to cover all issues.

The decisions of the upper parliaments are binding for the lower ones. The existing
second chambers, the House of Lords, the Senate, or the Rajya Sabha (Council of
States) could constitute the third level, safeguarding the cultural diversity of the
partial states.

There must also be a circular feedback from the “lower” chambers to the upper
ones. This can easily be provided by several parliamentary “lectures” in which the
representatives of each chamber can publicly give their statements to any legislative
project.

Taking into account the vote of the other chambers - as well as that of extraparliamentarian social groups - contains the circular feedback. If a clear majority of all
three other chambers presents converging concerns against a bill, it would be
factually as well as tactically unwise to ignore these concerns, even if by the
hierarchical point of view this would be legal. So the votes of the chambers 1 and 2
undoubtedly have influence on the deputies in chambers 3 and 4 and vice versa. As
the members of parliament must all four years (for example) face re-election,
although not all at the same time, there is a feedback-circuit.

There are many practical questions concerning the rhythm of independent elections
for each chamber, concerning the number of parliamentarians (which must not
increase, on the contrary!), and concerning a possible corresponding division of the
government and the administration in the proper sense, etc.

The real main question is: How to win the minds and hearts of people, especially the
members of the political and economic class? Besides an already rather numerous
agreement among “normal” people, there must be forerunners among the elite,
people of influence, which have not only the intellectual capacity to recognize the
unique value of this model, but above all the spiritual drive or motivation to stand for
it. Still more than for truth-finding alone, it needs spiritual qualities for the realization
of truth and justice. For there are too many privileged circles which are against such
a big change, even though it would be for the wealth of all."

(https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Diamonds_of_Integral_Philosophy)


=Source=

'''* Book: Diamonds of Integral Philosophy. An outline of the book “Integral Philosophy”. by Johannes Heinrichs.'''

[[Category:Democracy]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]