=Discussion=

Barry Rodriguez:

"In 1954, the Institute on Religion in  an  Age  of  Science  (IRAS)  formed,  which  included  astronomer  Harlow  Shapley,  a  founder  of  cosmography, which had led  to studies in Cosmic Evolution at Harvard  University.  IRAS  helped  found  Zygon:  Journal  of  Religion  and  Science  twelve  years  later,  and  its  contributors  included  leading  scholars  and  educators  in  macro-historical  studies,  like  astrophysicist  Eric  Chaisson and biologist Ursula Goodenough.74Archbishop Lazar Puhalo of the Orthodox Church in  America  had  been  a  dynamic  and  early  advocate  for  science,  rationalism,  and  faith.  His  book,  On  the  Neurobiology of Sin (2010), served as a bridge between the two cultures. He joined the dialogue of big history, speaking, along with other big historians, at the Global Futures 2045 conferences in Moscow (2012) and New York  (2013).  He  raised  important  moral  questions  about issues like immortality and artificial intelligence and participated in the IBHA conferences.

Cosmologist  Brian  Swimme  worked  with  Catholic  philosopher  Thomas  Berry  and  began  the  Center  for  the  Story  of  the  Universe  in  1989,  which  was  affiliated  with  the  California  Institute  of  Integral  Studies  in  San Francisco. This led them into deeper collaboration with religion scholars John Grimm and Mary Tucker, who  founded  the  Forum  on  Religion  and  Ecology  at  Yale University in 2006. Their production of The Journey of the Universe (2011) was a multimedia synthesis of Berry’s and others’ views of spiritual meaning in the cosmos. Parallel to this work, the Philadelphia Center for Religion and Science had grown into the Metanexus Institute by 1997 and, through its director, William Grassie, became a supporter of big history. Jennifer  Morgan,  a  journalist  and  educator,  also  grew out of this tradition of the Universe Story. After participating  in  an  Earth  Literacy  Program  at  Gene-sis Farm in Blairstown, New Jersey, she composed the Universe Story Trilogy for children between 2002 and 2006, consulting with noted scholars like astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson and anthropologist Jane Goodall. She then developed the Deeptime Network (2014) with a mission to unite all faith traditions with each other and with science.77Pope  Francis’s  Laudato  Si’,  On  Care  for  our  Com-mon Home (2015) led to renewed actions by Catholics around the world to conserve the planet. Among them, in  2016,  Prashant  Olalekar  and  Orla  Hazra  merged  these ideas with Thomas Berry’s “New Story” and a big history paradigm to establish their course, Awakening to Cosmic Compassion, at the Department of Interreligious Studies, St. Xavier’s College, Mumbai.78Educator  Luis  Calingo  had  served  as  Provost  of  Dominican  University  of  California  when  it  added  big history to its core curriculum. In 2015, he became President  of  Holy  Angel  University,  a  major  research  institute in central Luzon, Philippines (his home area) and, two  years later, sent professors to the Summer Institute in Big History at Dominican. Holy Angel  then began a two-course big history sequence the following year.  With  the  largest  Roman  Catholic  population  in  Asia,  but  acknowledging  the  Philippines’  Islamic  and  animistic traditions, Holy Angel promotes big history along with its many philosophical traditions.79While much of the overt and well-publicized efforts at  rapprochement  between  science  and  religion  exist  in a western context, especially among Christians, that does not mean that such efforts do not exist elsewhere. Besides  helping  Malaysia’s  farmers  adapt  to  changing  land  and  climate,  soil  scientist  Shamshuddin  bin  Ju-sop  also  had  been  active  in  guiding  Muslims  to  see  how Islam and modern science are bound together, as in  his  popular  text,  The  Earth  Story:  Lessons  from  the  Quran and Science (2006). Similarly, physician H. Su-darshan, a Vedic scholar living among the Soliga tribal people of South India for over forty years, adapted his worldviews and medical practices in a complex weave of science and community service, as delivered by his medical/educational NGOs, the Karuna Trust, and the Vivekananda Girijana Kalyana Kendra.80While big history discussions often centre on urban forms of education, it must be kept in mind that many tribal societies from which civilization grew maintain holistic  and  inclusive  concepts  of  existence.  It  is  acknowledged  that  their  low-impact  survival  strategies  could  help  correct  the  lifestyle  of  dominant  societies.  Far  from  being  an  exotic  primitivism,  or  a  return  to  nature,   tribal   experience   encompasses   Traditional   Ecological  Knowledge  (TEK),  while  connecting  with  the  scientific  community,  as  in  the  1994  founding  of  the  Alaska  Native  Science  Commission.  Traditional  societies have a major potential to re-envision our future in a big  history context. Such   bridges   have   already   been   opened,   as   in   biologist Edward Wilson’s The Creation: An Appeal to Save Life on Earth (2006) and recently led to the global anthology, Science,  Religion,  and  Deep  Time  (2022), edited   by   big   historians   Lowell   Gustafson,   Barry   Rodrigue, and David Blanks."

(https://jbh.journals.villanova.edu/index.php/JBH/article/view/2721/2582)

[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]