
'''* Report: SPREAD Sustainable Lifestyles 2050. By Juha Leppänen , Aleksi Neuvonen et al.''' 

URL = http:www.sustainable-lifestyles.eu

=Description=

"SPREAD Sustainable Lifestyles 2050 is a European
social platform project running from January
2011 to December 2012. Different societal
stakeholders – from business, research, policy
and civil society – have been invited to participate
in the development of a vision for sustainable
lifestyles in 2050. This process will result in
a roadmap for strategic action that will identify
opportunity spaces for policy, business, research
and civil society to take action to enable
more sustainable lifestyles across Europe."

=The four scenarios=

For a two-version quadrant summary of the four scenarios, see page 10 and 11 in the report.

Comparative lifestyle matrix see page 56-57

==Singular Super Champions==

"In the scenario Singular Super Champions Europe
has made the leap to a new type of sustainable,
competitive and equitable economy:

a result of numerous treaties, declarations and
official goals starting from 2035. The leap is
achieved with the deployment of market instruments
that also radically reform many conditions
that have shaped European lifestyles over
the past decades. Cleantech and upcycling
businesses flourish as sustainability has become
the business opportunity of the century. Europe
of Singular Super Champions is a society that
celebrates an ethos of learning, achieving and
self-mastery."

'''Drivers:'''

Singular Super Champions scenario
narrative – how did it all happen?

»» The European Green New Deal

»» Transparency gets the prices right

»» The upcycling economy

»» Learning, not earning

Six-pack of most influential lifestyle triggers

1. Transparent product data allows people to understand the environmental cost of their personal
consumer choices and their overall lifestyle. Comparing the sustainability of choices of food, housing,
mobility and consumer goods in 2050 is as easy as comparing prices was in 2012.

2. Road pricing and the overall rise of transportation costs change housing preferences. People
prefer short commuting distances, well-serviced neighbourhoods and a better access to spaciousness.

3. Improved design of public spaces and flats draws people to densely populated areas. In all countries,
areas around city centres turn into the most desirable places to live. People are willing to
trade off a spacious dwelling for the status and comfort provided by a flat in a central location.

4. New dietary alternatives emerge from a combination of rising food prices and increased health
consciousness. Media, primary education and catering companies help environmentally rational
diets become a mainstream lifestyle option.

5. Apps for personal informatics, educational software, online learning networks and a diversified
educational services sector become attractive and influence people’s spending. As a result, there
is less desire for material goods, as more people have excellent skills in making rational choices.

6. New upcycling approaches to consumer goods have changed product lifecycles. All material
goods are sold with an additional deposit on their material resources, which encourages people to
return used materials to the retailer."


==Governing the Commons==

"Governing the Commons is a scenario mostly
in digital reality that helps people to break free
from many cultural constraints and, eventually,
to reach sustainability. Ubiquitous computing
enables the smart use of resources and, at the
same time, redirects people’s behaviour and
focus of attention from material consumption
and their physical surroundings to interaction in
the digital realm. People abandon many institutions
of the 20th century, liberate themselves in
order to lead more meaningful lives and engage
in new forms of collaboration.


'''Drivers:'''

how did it all happen?

»» The 3rd industrial revolution

»» Ubitech economy

»» Better work creates well-being

»» Wikidemocracy


Six-pack of most influential lifestyle triggers

1. All appliances and buildings are equipped with the technology to advise their users on smart use
and maintenance requirements. Smart, energy efficient use is the default option. With the help of
diverse and plentiful data about their own and their peers’ homes, people receive feedback that
encourages them to repair their homes so they reach maximum energy efficiency.

2. Smart mobility services change the way people plan their time, and how they combine routes and
modes of transport. These services help to optimize public transportation use and enable the development
of vehicle and ride sharing schemes.

3. Ubiquitous technologies give rise to a new ecosystem of Peer-to-Peer—services that are available
for people whenever they need or want them. These services with retrofitting homes or choosing
sustainable dietary options, among other things.

4. A new generation of virtual reality and online communities becomes popular, which means a decrease
in needs for large living spaces, furniture and even foodstuffs.

5. The scale up of 3D-printing changes the way people seek self-actualisation. Consuming goods
designed and made by someone else is no longer the most elaborate way to express one’s identity
and style. Instead, people collectively design the goods they desire and want to be identified with.

6. Online networks built on a shared interest in lifestyle issues enable people to realise their potential
and to constitute themselves as groups with political power. The example and support of other network
members encourages experimentation with new sustainable lifestyle patterns. Gradually these
networks and experiments grow into movements that start reforming the political agenda."


==Local Loops==

"Local Loops is a scenario in which a radical
energy crisis forces societies to re-evaluate fundamentally
the foundations of their well-being.

Energy and resource systems are increasingly
seen though “Local Loops”, which is a technical
concept that can be applied in the context
of local and regional production cycles. People
build their lifestyle and ways of belonging
around their work, while technology is better
adapted through local design solutions, which
create room for new kinds of professionalism.
A new ethos of craftsmanship and professional
communities shape the way people live, organize
their work and spend their leisure time.


'''Drivers:'''

how did it all happen?

»» Peak-oil game-changer

»» Rediscovery of local resources

»» Local turn

»» Craftsman attitude


Six-pack of most influential lifestyle triggers

1. Extremely high energy and food prices persuade people to focus their choices on local
and secure alternatives.

2. Tight workplace and neighbourhood-based communities enable and encourage people
to share spaces and equipment. The need for living space is reduced.

3. People live close to their guild peers. Ample service options mean minimal need to
commute outside the neighbourhood.

4. People prefer appliances, furniture and clothes to be sold as services. Maintenance
and adaptation services are improved and they significantly prolong the lifecycle of
products.

5. Consumers can no longer make mistakes: policies built on scientifically backed environmental
and health objectives eliminate bad choices.

6. People eat out more. Better food services ensure a healthy diet, adjust portions to
optimal size, eliminate food waste and help people focus on their work and social life."


==Empathetic Communities==

'Empathetic Communities is a scenario where
Western societies faced a crisis they had long
dreaded, and how the change turned out to be
easier and more fruitful than anyone had expected.

It is a story in which the global economy as
we knew it in 2012 fails, followed by paralysis of
nation states and their political decision-making
structures. By 2050 this all leads to lifestyles in
which the community and neighbourhoods have
an important role in everyday life. New forms
of collaboration and governance grow on the
level of cities and towns making them the most
powerful level of public decision-making. In Empathetic
Communities the many fruits of global
culture and advancements in latest 
technological innovation are enjoyed, although people in
general focus on communicating and developing
solutions on the local level.


'''Drivers:'''

how did it all happen?

»» The system breaks down

»» “We can” generation works together

»» Public, private and people (PPP) – the new welfare

»» Communitisation of urban planning

Six-pack of most influential lifestyle triggers

1. Rising energy and food prices combined with a long economic downturn lead to people becoming
more interested in and aware of the structures that underpin their lifestyle patterns, as
well as of alternative, cost-effective solutions to current food, housing and mobility patterns.

2. Do-it-yourself (DIY) farming, energy production and retrofitting solutions gain popularity among
many of the unemployed. The internet and social networks help spread best practices quickly
and create space for alternative economies.

3. New local partnerships empower people to shape their neighbourhoods to better facilitate selfsufficiency
in food and energy production, and in different forms of communal consumption
(shared use of tools, appliances and spaces).

4. Health ceases to be an individual issue and becomes a communal one. People practice preventive
healthcare in workplaces and in neighbourhoods together with their peers.

5. New tools and services for interior designs make people think about their homes in new ways.
The functionality and flexibility of homes are features that people in 2050 are able to compare
and improve as easily as people used to compare living space in 2012.

6. Occasional shortages change attitudes and expectations. A reduction in food, living space,
consumer expenditure, travel and other leisure time activities is compensated for by the richness
of social life and a sense of purpose in one’s work and communal activities."


=Excerpts=

==Facts on Unsustainable Lifestyles in Europe==

"The scenarios for sustainable lifestyles 2050
present four different prototypes of possible
future societies that all support more sustainable
lifestyles. Our lifestyle scenarios are based on the
foundations of sustainable systems, and explore
different options in an attempt to acknowledge
the diversity among European citizens.


The critical impacts of current European
lifestyles are:

• Food and drink, private transport and housing
together account for 70-80% of Europe’s
environmental impacts stemming from final
consumption (Tukker, A., G. Huppes, et al.
(2006)).

• Meat and dairy consumption alone account
for almost one quarter (24%) of all final consumption
impacts – by far the largest share
in the food and drink sector (Weidema et al.
2008).

• Domestic heating, water consumption, appliance
and electronics use accounts for 40%
of Europe’s total energy consumption (with
heating alone accounting for 67% of household
energy consumption in the EU-27) (EEA
2010).

• Car ownership in the EU-27 increased by
more than one third (35%) in the period
between 1990 and 2007 (EEA 2010) and EU
drivers currently own one third of the world’s
750 million cars (IEA 2010).

• In the EU-27, approximately 60% of adults
and over 20% of school-age children are
overweight or obese. Coronary heart diseases
(CHD) often associated with fatty foods and
smoking, remain the single most common
cause of death in the EU (WHO 2011).'


==The [[Material Footprint]]==

"In order to create scenarios for sustainable lifestyles
in 2050, we need definitions and common
targets to specify what is meant by ”sustainable
lifestyles”. In the SPREAD project we have defined
the material footprint of a sustainable lifestyle
at 8000 kg per annum (p.a.) for one person.
This quantified target forms the fundamental
assumption on which each of our four developed
and previously described scenarios is built. Our
scenarios describe what 8000 kg living can look
like in four diverse future societies.

The 8000 kg p.a. of material footprint per person
is based on the work of Michael Lettenmeier,
Stefan Bringezu, Friedrich Schmidt-Bleek et al
from the Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment
and Energy on a safe and sustainable level
of natural resource use.

The material footprint is a tool to measure and
manage or optimize the resource consumption of
our lifestyles, including the products and production
processes behind them (i.e. in the areas of
consuming, moving, housing and health). In this
context, our sustainable lifestyle material footprint
means the use of renewable and non-renewable
material resources (excl. water and air) plus the
erosion caused by agriculture and forestry. It covers
the whole lifecycle from the extraction of raw
materials to the processing industry, distribution,
consumption, recycling, and disposal.
The idea of the material footprint is to provide
a comprehensive and understandable tool to
reduce different kinds of present and future environmental
challenges (for example in the areas of
food, mobility, housing and health).

When the material footprint of an average European
lifestyle drops from 27000 – 40 000 (approximate
current average lifestyle footprint per
person) to 8000 kg per year, the environmental
and resulting social impacts of our lifestyles will
drop and change considerably. The material
footprint thus serves as a tool to comprehensively
direct lifestyles to levels within planetary boundaries
as described e.g. by Johan Rockström and
other scientists (see below). It also provides a way
to measure progress and milestones of success
towards our future sustainable lifestyle goals.

The material footprint of 8000 kg p.a. consists
of household goods, food and beverages, everyday
mobility and tourism, electricity, heating
and housing. However, the composition of the
footprint is not similar for everyone. The share of
consumption in a material footprint of 8000 kg
p.a. can differ based on the values, needs and
aspirations of each person’s unique lifestyle. For
example, some people may accumulate more of
their footprint through mobility while others move
less, but live in a larger apartment. Not everyone
needs to live the same way, but – at least on average
– everyone must live within boundaries of our
planetary system in order to realize our sustainable
future."


=References=

* IEA (2010) “Energy technologies Perspectives 2010: Scenarios and strategies to 2050.”
International Energy Agency, Paris.

* EEA (2010a) “The European environment – state
and outlook 2010: synthesis.”

* European Environment Agency, Copenhagen.
Lettenmeier, M. (2012) “Sustainable material
footprint 2050.” Presentation at the Factor X
Network Meeting 13.-14.2.2012 in Berlin. D-mat,
Finland.

* Lähteenoja, S., Lettenmeier, M. & Salo, M.
(2008) “The ecological backpack: versatile indicator
for sustainable consumption.” Presentation
at the Con-Account Conference, 11.–12.9.2009,
Charles University, Prague.

* Rockström J. et al. (2011) “Planetary boundaries:
Exploring the safe operating space for humanity.” [http://www.stockholmresilience.org/download/18.8615c78125078c8d3380002197/ES-2009-3180.pdf]

* Tukker, H., et al. (2006) “Environmental impact of
products (EIPRO): Analysis of the life cycle environmental
impacts related to the final consumption
of the EU-25.” JRC/IPTS/ ESTO: 139, Seville.

* UNDP (2011) “Forecasting the impacts of environmental
constraints on human development.” [http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2011/papers/HDRP_2011_08.pdf]

Weidema, B., et al. (2008) “Environmental improvement
potentials of meat and dairy products.”

* P. Eder & L. Delgado (Eds.), [http://www.saiplatform.org/uploads/Library/EnvironmentalImprovementsPotentialsofMeatandDairyProducts.pdf]

* WHO (2011) “Obesity and overweight.” Fact
sheet N°311, updated March 2011.


=More Information=

* Online community: www.sustainable-lifestyles.eu/community

* Project Coordinator: UNEP/Wuppertal Institute Collaborating; Centre on Sustainable Consumption and Production (CSCP) [http://www.scp-centre.org]] ; Cheryl Hicks, Project Director: cheryl.hicks@scp-centre.org

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Europe]]