
=Source=

* http://wiki.auroville.org.in/w/images/b/bb/Student_guide_to_The_Human_Cycle_-_Muriel.pdf

=Discussion=

From Auroville's student  guide to Aurobindo's The [[Human Cycle]] (excerpted from chapter 1):

"in	pre-war	Germany,	a	first	psychological	theory	of	history was	conceived.	The	theorist	
(Lamprecht)	supposed	that	human	society progresses	through	certain	distinct	psychological	stages:	
symbolic,	typal	and	conventional,	individualist and	subjective.	

We	will	leave	aside the Western	thinker’s	own	dealings	with	his	idea and	keep	the	suggestive names	
he	has	offered	us.


==The	symbolic	stage==

Predominantly	spiritual and religious (and	actively	imaginative	in	its	religion).
A	strongly	symbolic	mentality	pervades	its	thought,	customs	and	institutions.	The	symbol	is	of	
something	which	man	feels to	be	present	behind	himself	and	his	life	and	his	activities— the	Divine.	

All	his	religious	and	social institutions,	all	the	moments	and	phases	of	his	life	are	to	him symbols.

Ex:	Vedic	age	

• The	religious	institution	of sacrifice governs	the	whole	society	(as	a	study	of	the	Brahmanas
and	Upanishads	shows	us)

• The	social	institutions penetrated	with	the	symbolic	spirit. Ex:	The	hymn	of	the	Rig	Veda	=
marriage hymn	à the whole	sense	of	the	hymn	turns	about	the successive	marriages	of
Surya,	daughter	of	the	Sun,	with	different	gods	and	the	human	marriage	is	quite	a	
subordinate	matter.	The	human	is	an	inferior	figure	and	image	of	the	divine.

• The	ideal	of	the	relation	between	man	and	woman governed	by	the	symbolism	of	the	
relation	between	the	Purusha	and	Prakriti,	the	male	and	female	divine	Principles	in	the	
universe.	In	the	earlier	Vedic	times	when	the	female	principle	stood	on	a	sort	of	equality	
with	the	male	in	the	symbolic	cult,	woman	was	as	much	the	mate	as	the	adjunct	of	man;	in	
later	times	when	the	Prakriti	has	become	subject	in	idea	to	the	Purusha,	the	woman	also	
depends	entirely	on	the	man.	In	the	Tantrik	Shakta	religion	which	puts	the	female	principle	
highest,	there	is	an	attempt	which	could	not	get	itself	translated	into	social	practice,	to	
elevate	woman.

• the	institution	of	the	fourfold	order,	caturvarna, miscalled	the	system of	the	four	castes.


The	four	orders	are	described	as	having	sprung from	the	body	of	the	
creative	Deity from	his	
• head	à Brahmins =	men	of	knowledge
• arms	à Kshatriyas =	men	of	power
• thighs	à Vaishyas =	producers	and	support	of	society
• feet	à Shudras =	servant


This	symbol	of	the	Creator’s	body	was	more	than	an	image, it	expressed	a	divine	reality.	Human	
society	= an attempt	to	express	in	life	the	cosmic	Purusha. Man	and	the	cosmos	are	both	of	them	
symbols	and	expressions of	the	same	hidden	Reality.


From	this	symbolic	attitude	came	the	tendency	to	make everything	in	society	a	sacrament,	religious	
and	sacrosanct,	but as	yet	with	a	large	and	vigorous	freedom	in	all	its	forms.

• The	spiritual	idea governs	all;	
• the	symbolic religious	forms which	support	it	are	fixed	in	principle;	
• the	social forms are	lax,	free	and	capable	of	infinite	development.	


First, the	symbolic	idea of	the	four	orders…
…expressing	the	Divine	in	man	as: …answering	to	4 cosmic	principles:
knowledge
power
production,	enjoyment	and	mutuality	
service,	obedience	and	work

* the	Wisdom that	conceives	the	order	and	principle	of	things
* the	Power that	sanctions,	upholds	and	enforces	it
* the	Harmony that	creates	the	arrangement	of	its	parts
* the	Work that	carries	out	what	the	rest	direct


Next,	out	of	this	idea	there developed	a	firm	but	not	yet	rigid	social	order based	upon

1. temperament	and	psychic	type	with	a	corresponding ethical	discipline

2. the	social	and	economic function.


==The	typal	stage==

Predominantly	psychological and ethical;	all	else,	even	the	spiritual	and	religious,	is	subordinate	to
the	psychological	idea	and	to	the	ethical	ideal	which	expresses	it.
The	idea of	the	direct	expression	of	the	divine	Being	or	cosmic	Principle	in man	ceases	to	dominate	
and	finally	disappears.

This	stage	creates	the	great	social	ideals.

Ex:	idea	of	social	honour :

• of	the	Brahmin:	purity,	piety,	high	reverence	for	the things	of	the	mind	and	spirit	and	
disinterested	possession	and exclusive	pursuit	of	learning	and	knowledge.

• of	the Kshatriya :	courage,	chivalry,	strength,	a	certain proud	self-restraint	and	self-mastery,	
nobility	of	character	and the	obligations	of	that	nobility.

• of	the	Vaishya:	rectitude	of	dealing,	mercantile	fidelity,	sound production,	order,	liberality	
and	philanthropy.

• of	the Shudra:	obedience,	subordination,	faithful service,	disinterested	attachment.


But	these	cease	to	spring	naturally	out	of	the	inner	life	of	the	man;	they become	a convention…	
à the typal	passes	naturally	into	the	conventional	stage.


==The	conventional	stage	==

The	external supports,	the	outward	expressions of	the	spirit	or	the	ideal become	more	important
than	the	ideal.

Ex: the	outward	supports	of	the	ethical	fourfold	order,— birth,	economic	function,	religious	ritual	
and	sacrament,	family custom,—each	began	to	exaggerate.

At	first,	birth	not	of	the	first	importance,	for	faculty and	capacity	prevailed;	but	afterwards,	as	the	
type	fixed	itself,	its maintenance	by	education	and	tradition	became	necessary	à hereditary groove.	

Birth	and	profession	were	together	the	double	bond	of	the	hereditary	convention.

This	rigidity	once	established,	the	maintenance	of	the	ethical type	passed	from	the	first	place	to	a	
secondary importance.	Once	ceasing	to be indispensable,	it	came	inevitably	to	be	dispensed	with.

Finally,	even	the	economic	basis	began	to disintegrate àbirth,	family	custom	and	remnants,	
deformations, new	accretions	of	meaningless	or	fanciful	religious	sign	and ritual (caricature	of	the	
old	profound symbolism) became	the	riveting	links	of	the	system	of	caste.
The	unclean	and	diseased	decrepitude	of	the	old	system	has begun;	it	has	become	a	name,	a	shell,	a	
sham…	(= present	state	of	the	caste	system	in	India).


The	tendency	of	the	conventional	age	is	to	

• fix,	arrange	firmly,	formalise,	
• erect	a	system	of	rigid	grades	and hierarchies,
• stereotype	religion,	
• bind	education	and	training to	a	traditional	and	
unchangeable	form,	
• subject	thought	to infallible	authorities


It has its	golden	age	when	the	spirit	and	thought	that	inspired	its	forms are	confined	but	yet	living
but	still: the	Truth	we	strive	to	arrive at	is	not	realised,	not	accomplished,	and	what we	have	of	the	
reality	has	begun	to	fossilise	and	is	doomed	to	be lost	in	rule	and	order	and	convention.

For	always	the	form	prevails and	the	spirit	recedes…


It	attempts	to	return,	to	revive	the	form	but the	time-tendency	is	too	strong	à ex:	

• history	of	religion: the	efforts	of	the	saints	and	religious	reformers	become	progressively	
more	scattered,	brief	and	superficial	in	their	actual	effects.

• India	in	her	last	millennium: the	constant	effort	of	the	most	powerful	spiritual	personalities	
kept	the	soul	of	the	people	alive	but	failed	to	resuscitate	the	ancient	free	force	and	truth	
and	vigour.


==The	individualistic	age==

Arrives a	period	when	the	gulf	between	the	convention	and	the	truth becomes	intolerable	and	the
men	of	intellectual	power	arise, who,	rejecting	symbol	and	type	and convention,	seek the Truth	
that	society	has	lost.	

The	Age	of	Protestantism	has	begun,	the	Age	of	Reason,	the	Age	
of	Revolt,	Progress,	Freedom (a	partial	and	external	freedom	
betrayed	by	the	conventional	age	into	the	idea	that	the	Truth	can	
be	found	in	outsides).	

A necessary	passage	to	the	subjective	period	of	humanity."

(http://wiki.auroville.org.in/w/images/b/bb/Student_guide_to_The_Human_Cycle_-_Muriel.pdf)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]