'''= " a coalition of individuals and organizations who are committed to inspiring public will to change our ecologically destructive system".''' [https://www.stableplanetalliance.org/about]

URL = https://www.stableplanetalliance.org/


=Description=

"Our aim is to create a compassionate, just, ecologically sustainable world, rather than continuing on our present course of ecological self-destruction and possibly nuclear war.

Other groups have similar intentions. However, collectively we are not succeeding. Environmental trends are getting worse, and fossil fuel use is going up, despite the uptake in renewable energy.

Stable Planet Alliance is organized to be the nucleus for a new kind of social change movement, bigger than all of us.

At the heart of it is our intention to inspire public will to change our destructive system sufficiently that we operate within the Earth’s capacity to support us, and the prospect of nuclear war becomes a thing of the past.

We think this is a matter, not of messages, but of helping people think better, and function better emotionally. We are catalyzing healthy social evolution.

No group has the reach to affect public consciousness sufficiently on its own. We think it will take an alignment of many groups. We can make common cause in communicating to inspire public will to create a compassionate, just, ecologically sustainable world."

(https://www.stableplanetalliance.org/about)


=More information=

* with a similar aim: The [[EcoRestoration Alliance]]
** [[Global EverGreening Alliance]]
** [[Institute for Ecological Civilization]]
** [[Planetary Emergency Partnership]]

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]