

"Star Wreck movie of which it’s been said that it’s '''the most successful feature-length Internet-distributed film of all time.''' [It] was made by 3000 people, has been downloaded 8 million times, is under a CreativeCommons license, and made good money both through DVD sales, and through an eventual deal with Universal.’ [http://www.smartmobs.com/2008/05/08/iron-sky-a-new-indie-movie-from-the-finnish-team-of-star-wreck/]

URL = http://www.starwreck.com/introduction.php

=Description=

From the Website: '''Star Wreck: In the Pirkinning''' is a feature-length sci-fi parody, seven years in the making. It is the product of a core group of five Finns, and over 300 extras, assistants and supporters. The film combines world-class visual effects, a rough-and-ready sense of humour, and a passion that provide the basis for the first-ever Finnish science fiction adventure.

When '''Star Wreck 5''' appeared online for free download in 1997, it was a groundbreaking phenomenon. Never before had a film of such proportions (about 45 minutes in length) been released for free, and the word began to spread on message boards and mailing lists. 

Star Wreck: In the Pirkinning follows in the footsteps of its forerunner, and is one of the first feature-length quality special-effects films ever to be released online for free.

The torch is being carried by thousands of fans worldwide. They have been tireless in their support for the seven-year production and ensured that the team has kept their faith and their energy. The quality of Star Wreck is largely thanks to their expectations, the meeting of which became a point of honour for the creators.



Thats what the producers say: "The big productions couldn't afford catering for the money that went into our film, yet the end result is in many ways a historic, loved, and appreciated film. The Secret Ingredient was passion and the will to prove that not everything is about money."

It is interesting to see if all this was a one-time extraordinary event - could well be that it is a ground for the promotion of http://www.energiaproductions.fi/ - or if this was the beginning of p2p filmmaking in Finland.


=More Information=


#2nd project: [[Iron Sky]]



[[Category:Media]]


[[Category:Webcasts]]