
Mathieu O'Neil:

"So far, we have discussed two forms of collaborative production which relatively tend
to the horizontal organization (non-capitalist collaborative production and the mixed one)
and one form in which a particular kind of agent centralizes the power over the reticular
collaborative process (capitalist collaborative production). Nevertheless, an organizational
scheme as the latter not necessarily ought to be commanded by a commercial firm. The
main candidate to play this non-commercial centralization role is the State.

...

A first interesting case is [[Peer to Patent]], a website which cooperates with the U.S.
Patent office (USPTO)."

...

The second example is British, related to the health system and extremely easy. PatientOpinion.org. is a website which allows to produce collaboratively opinions about
different hospitals, health centers, hospices and doctors in the United Kingdom and in the
National Health System (NHS). Here again, we face a collaborative production process in
which the platform and some key data are managed by the state or an institution which
depends on it. Nevertheless, unlike Peer to Patent, in Patient Opinion producers are actually
consumers.

...

Summarizing, in order to conceptualize the ideal type of State collaborative production,
the features of the different given examples have to be abstracted. In spite of being a poorly
developed form yet, it seems reasonable to assume that it might grow in the immediate
future. There are two productive agents here: above-mentioned producers / users and state
agents who operate the centralized platform. Although companies might be part of the
group of producers, that is not a norm in this form. The decisive factor here is that,
ultimately, regulation of information flows and, more specifically, the possibility of using
them as critical inputs for their own production process, is in the hand of state institutions
-which could be municipal, regional, national or international."
(http://cspp.oekonux.org/scientific-committee/latest-submissions/regular-issue-p2p-theory/Collaborative%20production.pdf/at_download/file)


=Source=

2010 submission to the CSPP journal: [http://cspp.oekonux.org/scientific-committee/latest-submissions/regular-issue-p2p-theory/Collaborative%20production.pdf/at_download/file)


=More Information=

* [[Collaborative Production]], with typology of 3 other modalities

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]