
'''* Report: United Nations Environment Programme (2022). State of Finance for Nature. Time to act: Doubling investment by 2025 and eliminating nature-negative finance flows. Nairobi.''' 

URL = https:// wedocs.unep.org/20.500.11822/41333


=Description=

"The State of Finance for Nature (SFN) 2022 report quantifies public and private finance flows to nature-based solutions (NbS) to tackle global challenges related to biodiversity loss, land degradation and climate change. Current investments are compared to investment needed to meet targets of the Rio Conventions under the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD), United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). This report is the second in a series that aims to inform public and private actors about progress against key targets and the extent to which finance flows are aligned with global targets and the investment needed to limit global warming to below 1.5 or 2°C, halt biodiversity loss and achieve land degradation neutrality. It also provides high-level recommendations on how to scale up financial flows to NbS and improve alignment with nature-positive outcomes. 

This second edition has a broader scope than the inaugural report in 2021. First, analysis of capital flows has been expanded to include marine nature-based solutions. Second, the investment in NbS needed to limit climate change to below 1.5°C (in addition to the 2°C target) is estimated, given the enormous impact this has on nature and people. Third, public nature-negative capital flows have been quantified, to put into context capital flows to NbS. Fourth, the benefits of investing in NbS have been estimated to demonstrate to politicians, business and finance leaders that nature is a large part of the solution to global crises."


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Statistics]]