= IJCCR Special Issue, [[Complementary Currencies]]: State of the Art

URL = http://www.ijccr.net


=Description=

"The International Journal of Community Currency Research (IJCCR) has produced a
special edition which details some of the recent developments in the field of
complementary currencies. It contains fifteen short papers which encompass
discussions of the wider field, geographic reviews and reports on new forms of
currency innovation. The edition highlights the growing range of experiments and
contexts within which complementary currencies are being mobilised to solve
economic, social and environmental problems."
(http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/ijccr/message/8654)



=Contents=


==Classifying ‘CCs’: Community, Complementary and Local Currencies==

Jérôme Blanc Boyle D 4-10, see: [[Classyfying Complementary Currencies]]

Since the emergence of “CCs” thirty years ago, attempts to build typologies and
to name things properly have always been disappointing, as if the very object of
the analysis escaped from any rigid classification. Even the terms
“complementary currency”, “community currency” and many others are not
considered similarly; as a result, there is no common typology shared by
scholars, activists and observers, beyond a series of general considerations
clearly distinguishing specific items between CC schemes. This paper presents a
novel attempt to classify and categorise CCs in a way which looks to future
developments, while capturing the diversity of historical origins. The ideal
types of community, complementary and local currencies let the possibility of
combinations able to analyze concrete forms of non-national and not-for-profit
currencies. The teleological exclusion of sovereignty and, more important,
profit motives must be emphasized. The present typology states that for-profit
currencies are of another nature than CCs, and it draws up an ideal-type of CCs
built around a democratic participation principle organized around non-profit
organizations, grassroots organizations or informal groupings of persons.





==Complementary Currencies in Germany: The [[Regiogeld]] System==

Christian Thiel D 17-21

In several places in Germany colourful slips of paper replace the Euro as a
medium of exchange. These unofficial tenders German Regiogeld, a phenomenon
which occurred around 2001 and spread rapidly all over Germany. It appears not
only with different names but also in various forms. The article introduces this
special complementary currency. It describes briefly – and from a sociological
point of view – what it is, how it has originated, the actual status quo and
possible future developments. It is based on my 4 year ethnographic research
which was done in the context of a sociological dissertation. For this article
one of my results is particular important: Regiogeld is a phenomenon which
originated in the fusing of different movements, a money-reform-oriented, an
esoteric and several regionalization-oriented.



==[[What Have Complementary Currencies in Japan Really Achieved]]?==

Yasuyuki Hirota D 22-26

Japan has been regarded from abroad as one of the most developed countries in
terms of CC systems, depicted by Kennedy and Lietaer (2004) as “the country in
the world with the most systems in operation today, but also the nation with the
greatest diversity of such experiments.” However, this paper argues that the
lack of literature about initiatives in languages other than Japanese has been a
hurdle that has not allowed Western researchers to grasp the real picture. This
article’s goal is to show the historical development of CC initiatives in this
East-Asian country, revealing how the very concept of having another means of
exchange for communities has been transformed over years by the unique
interpretations and the conceptual manipulation of Japanese promoters and
practitioners.



==Alternative Exchange Systems in Contemporary Greece==

Irene Sotiropoulou D 27-31

This paper is a brief report of several schemes that exist today, September
2010, in Greece and permit their members to perform transactions without any
official currency. The report covers parallel currency schemes, exchange
networks and several related initiatives that could be characterised as
alternative exchange or non-mainstream modes of economic activity.



==Complementary Currencies for Sustainable Local Economies in Central America==

Erik Brenes D 32-38

After more than a decade of researching, implementing and supervising
complementary currencies projects in the region, the Social Trade Organisation
Central America (STRO-CA) has accumulated many lessons learnt and developed
complementary currency methods along with strategies to stimulate its
circulation, but most of all to create stable, diversified and resilient local
economies in the cities where projects are in research, execution and/or
supervision. This report introduces the STRO-CA approach to complementary
currency development, and reflects on ten years of currency innovation and
development in Central America.



==Community Currency Progress in Latin America ([[Banco Palmas]])==

Christophe Place D 39-46

After losing its lawsuit against a community bank issuing a community currency,
the Central Bank of Brazil has just started a cooperation agreement with the
National Secretary for Solidarity Economy of the Labour Ministry of Brazil to
support and develop the current 51 community banks and their own social currency
in order to reach about 300 by 2012, becoming an exemplary model. This world
premiere central bank support associated with one of the highest amount of
community currency systems of Latin America brought Brazil as a significant site
of experimentation in this field. Furthermore, some daring innovations seem to
confirm this position in a long-term future unless this normative control of a
centralized institution decreases the creativity. Indeed, sustainable economic
orientation still needs creative tools, associated to an ethical vision, to
decrease material consumption dependence and increase post-materialist values
exchange: community currency transformation to an effective grassroots
innovation for sustainability, prosperity and democracy seems to be necessary.



==L’Accorderie and Le Jardin Universel (JEU) in Quebec==

Mathieu Lizotte and Gérard Duhaime D 47-51

This paper compares two of the most successful community currency systems in the
province of Quebec, Canada: l’Accorderie and Le Jardin d’Echange Universel
(JEU). The paper compares their founding principles and organisational
structures, and their mechanisms and mediums of exchange. While the former is
quite well-institutionalised and attempts to operate professionally, ‘within the
system’, the latter is a volunteer-run initiative with more ambiguous status.
The paper attempts to evalute their impacts, where data is available, and
concludes that while both exchange systems have their pros and cons, a definite
advantage for l’Accorderie is that its legal status gives them better access to
funding which ultimately permits them to offer their members the means by which
to form an economic strategy in both the informal economy, through exchanges,
and in the formal economy, through microcredit and participating in the monthly
buyer’s group. This is particularly important to its poorer members where every
dollar saved by making local exchanges can be used to improve their material
well-being in the formal economy.




==Kékfrank to Boost the Resilience of Locality==

Zsuzsanna Eszter Szalay D 52-56

A small group of entrepreneurs in Sopron (Hungary), led by Tamás Perkovátz,
decided in autumn of 2008, to make the local economy - which was previously
famous for its grape and wine - prosper again, and to unite the economies of the
area cut into three parts, belonging to three different countries. Thus they
created an European Cooperative Society (SCE), that had individuals and legal
entities from Hungary, Austria and Croatia as members, and the goal of the
Cooperative was defined as to introduce and operate a complementary currency
Kékfrank (blue franc, named for a wine variety), to be used within the region.
This paper presents the European Union directives and regulations that made the
creation of Kékfrank possible and finally it shows the main characteristics and
possible further developments of the new currency which was born in spring of
2010 through the first official exchange.



==The SOL: A Complementary Currency for the Social Economy and Sustainable Development==

Marie Fare D 57-60

This paper reviews experience with The SOL, a very innovative and interesting
complementary currency scheme which has been tested in France since 2007. It
aims to contribute to the development of the social and solidarity economy, and
contribute towards sustainable development. The SOL is the result of an informal
working group who in 1998 examinedthe different models of existing complementary
currencies schemes in the world. It aims to both introduce a new concept of
wealth not exclusively based on money and to foster the social economy or third
sector. Three different types of SOL are described: Co-operation SOL, Commitment
SOL, and Dedicated SOL, and the paper reflects on the currency’s strengths and
weaknesses, and developmental issues for the future.




==Building Local Resilience: The emergence of the UK Transition Currencies==

Josh Ryan-Collins D 61-67

This paper examines the emergence of a new type of local currency – ‘Transition
Currencies’ - in the United Kingdom over the past 4 years. The Transition
Currency ‘model’, shared by the initial four schemes, is explained and the
theoretical roots of the schemes reviewed. The paper goes on to examine the
success and limitations of the currencies and reflects on potential future
developments and how the Transition currencies might upscale and deliver
additional social, economic and environmental objectives.




==A Report from Vermont (USA): The VBSR Marketplace==

Amy Kirschner D 68-72

This paper described and evaluates a peer to peer mutual credit system now in
operation in the State of Vermont. It is called the VBSR Marketplace and is an
innovative partnership between a statewide membership association, Vermont
Businesses for Social Responsibility (VBSR) and a currency design and management
organization, Vermont Sustainable Exchange (VSE). This project is a significant
step forward in the community currency world as it makes participation in a
mutual credit system a membership benefit for businesses that belong to an
already existing and well-established business association.





==Time Banking in Social Housing==

Ruth Naughton-Doe D 73-76



A social enterprise Spice has pioneered a new method of time banking that works
with public services in an innovative way. Spice uses time banking as a ‘means
to an end tool’ to promote active citizenship, reduce welfare dependency and
ultimately reform public services with co-production. This article briefly
examines current time banking practices in the UK to set the scene for a
discussion of Spice’s approach when applied in Social Housing. Whilst in its
early stages, the approach demonstrates some success in increasing participation
and improving both individual and community well-being. This is an exciting new
use of community currencies to catalyse public sector reform.



==The Colours of Money: Artmoney as Community Currency==

Mark Banks D 77-81

Artmoney is a community currency based on the production and exchange of
original art. Critical of the cold and objective nature of conventional
transactions, the Danish artist Lars Kraemmer first devised artmoney as a means
to a more humanised and expressive type of monetary exchange, intending to bring
people together in affective, rather than impersonal, forms of trade. Artmoney
provides a means of stimulating trade amongst artists and non-artists outside of
the conventional money economy, and has grown steadily to become a global
currency traded in over 70 countries. Drawing from ongoing research, this
article asks, what is the meaning and value of art-money in a global cultural
economy? What alternative does it present and what economic futures (or pasts)
does it anticipate? Presenting preliminary findings from interview research with
art-money producers, this article outlines some of the motives for becoming
involved in this art/currency project, and some of the contradictions and
challenges raised in its production and circulation.



==[[Complementary Currency Open Source Software in 2010]]==

Matthew Slater D 82-87

This report briefly covers the field of non-commercial mutual credit software,
discussing the issues and challenges the projects collectively face in meeting
the needs of the movement. There is a clear cultural divide between commercial
barter software which helps businesses exchange spare capacity within the law,
and free open source projects which help neighbours to exchange under the radar
of the tax man. There is almost no cross-fertilisation between nonprofit,
idealistic, community projects, and the business barter. The aims of both
cultures are very different, though their methods are similar.




[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Economics]]