'''* Article: Enabled Innovation: Instruments and Methods of Internet-based Collaborative Innovation. Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva.'''

URL = http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf

Paper on [[Crowdsourcing]] enabled innovation prepared for the 1st Berlin Symposium on Internet and Society, Oct. 25–27, 2011


=Abstract=

'''1.'''

"Crowdsourcing has become a widely applied practice in the context
of innovation and problem solving. The paper provides first an overvierw of the
stste-of-the-art in crowdsourcing in terms of definitions used, application
areas, players involved as well as processes and tools. Than potential future
forms of crowdsourcing are discussed. Finally, based on the results of the first
two parts future research questions are extracted."


'''2.'''

"The goal of the state-of-the-art analysis of research in the field of crowdsourcing is
to provide an extensive overview of the available body of knowledge related to it
and to illustrate current developments on published single examples. The state-ofthe-
art analysis will focus on classifying crowdsourcing and providing an
overview of available knowledge on relevant aspects of crowdsourcing. It is based
on an extensive and systematic literature research and review. Besides providing
an overview, the literature review will also provide the bases for identification of
future research trends in crowdsourcing in particular and Internet-based
innovation in general."

=Contents=

"One major change happened in the relationship of companies to customers.

Terms as prosumers, open innovation, crowdsourcing denote the changing
relationships of companies to their customers and the participatory users on the
web. From passive consumers of defined products, customers are becoming
increasingly part of innovation processes in companies. The Internet as a
communication medium is the basis for new tools and platforms that are enabling
efficient collaboration as well as collection and sharing of contributions from a
large number of customers and users on a global scale. With the help of such
platforms companies are increasingly involving customers and users into their
innovation processes. The form and intensity of this involvement varies; staring
from crowdsourcing of ideas, for example for new products, over rating of such
ideas, to collective implementation of such ideas. Global Internet-based
collaborative innovation processes contribute increasingly to innovation processes
in companies.


The goal of this article is to provide an overview of the available body of
knowledge related to Internet-enabled innovation and concentrates on three
aspects:

1. To provide an overview of the state-of-the-art in Internet-based innovation
in terms of used definitions in literature, as well as published concept,
approaches and tools.

2. To illustrate potential future trends in crowdsourcing on the example of
user initiated crowdsourcing as well as crowdsourcing practices in the
media industry.

3. To identify and summarize potential future trends and future research
directions in Internet-based collaborative innovation.


In accordance with the article's goals, its content is structured as follows: 

Chapter 2 provides an overview of definitions and relates different terms denoting user
innovation. In the remaining chapters, the paper focuses on crowdsourcing.

Chapter 3 provides a comprehensive state-of-the art overview of literature related
to user innovation in crowdsourcing. 

Chapter 4 illustrates potential future trends
on two examples. 

Chapter 5 includes a discussion of results and concludes the
paper with a proposal for future research directions."


=Excerpts=

==Definitions==


===[[Prosumers]]===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"Most of the concepts for Internet-based innovation are based on or draw from the
concept of active customers that are at the same time producers. i.e. prosumers.
The vision to involve customers in the production process has a long tradition and
goes back to Alvin Toffler (cited in Klein & Totz 2004), who introduced the idea to
involve consumers as co-producers, i.e. prosumers, into the value chains of
companies in 1972. Under the pressure of increasing price competition in the 90s,
and enabled by the Internet, companies started to involve customer through
digitalized processes to voluntarily take over part of the value generation. A well
known example are banks, which based on e-banking involved the customers in
services such as cash collection through automated teller machines, self-processing
of payments and similar."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


===[[Lead-User Innovation]]===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"In order to denote the involvement of customers in the innovation process,
von Hippel (1978, 1986) described the important role of the user in innovation and
introduced the term lead-user innovation. According to him (von Hippel 2005) leadusers
have the following two characteristics: “… they are ahead of the majority of
users in their populations with respect to an important market trend, and they expect to
gain relatively high benefits from a solution to the needs they have encountered there.”
(von Hippel 2005). Thus, lead-user innovation is related to available products, and
is based on the experience of the user with the product and his background.
Other concepts related to Internet-based innovation that require active
users and customers are crowdsourcing, open innovation, open source software
development and user innovation communities."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)



===[[Crowdsourcing]]===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"The term crowdsourcing was introduced by Howe (2006) in order to denote the
new phenomena of outsourcing to the crowd. Howe (2006) provided also the very
first definition of crowdsourcing as follows: “… crowdsourcing represents the act of a
company or institution taking a function once performed by employees and outsourcing it
to an undefined and generally large network of people in the form of an open call. This can
take the form of peer production when the job is performed collaboratively, but is also often
undertaken by sole individuals. The crucial prerequisite is the use of the open call format
in the wide network of potential laborers.”

More recently in his blog, Howe (2008, 2009) consolidated the definition in
the following form:

· “The white paper version: crowdsourcing is the act of taking a job traditionally
performed by a designed agent (usually an employee) and outsourcing it to an
undefined, generally large group of people in the form of an open call.”

· “The sound bite version: The application of open source principals to fields outside
of software.”

Based on the original definition of Howe (2006) other authors provide extended
definitions that concretize the generic terms used by Howe. For example,
(Gassmann et. al. 2010), specify the tasks that are sourced from the crowd as being
mostly knowledge generating and problem-solving tasks, but also repetitive
tasks. They furthermore, concretize that the open call is supported through a
Website.

Both definitions point to the distinguishing features of crowdsourcing:

· It is initiated and coordinated by a company that outsources an existing
task or has a problem that needs a solution.

· It is directed to the crowd and not to companies and individual users.

· The usual way to initiate crowdsourcing is through an open call over the
Internet.


According to Surowiecki (2005), a crowd can be defined as a large set of
anonymous individuals. Implicit in this definition is the idea that a firm cannot
build its own crowd. The strength of the crowd is the possibility to choose from
the contribution of many contributors with different backgrounds, qualifications
and talents."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)
''''

===[[Open Innovation]]===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"According to Chesbrough, Vanhaverbeke & West (2006) “[…] open innovation is the
use of purposive inflows and outflows of knowledge to accelerate internal innovation, and
expand the markets for external use of innovation respectively.”

 
With this definition the
authors imply two types of open innovation knowledge flows: 

1) inside-out or
outbound knowledge flows involve knowledge developed within the firm and
made accessible to other firms; 

2) outside-in or inbound flows refer to knowledge
developed in the environment and being integrated by the firm."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)



===[[Open Source Software Communities]]===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"While crowdsourcing and open innovation are initiated by companies other forms
of Internet-based innovation can be completely initiated and carried out by users.

One of the earlier phenomena of user-initiated Internet-based innovation is open
source software communities. They emerged in the late 80s, but spread more
intensively after the broad diffusion of Internet. According to (von Hippel and
von Krogh, 2009), “Open source software is software that is made freely available to all.
Open source software development projects are Internet-based communities of software
developers who voluntarily collaborate to develop software that they or their organizations
need … Well-known examples of open source software having many users are the
GNU/Linux computer operating systems, Apache server software and the Perl
programming language.”

The characteristics of open source software communities can be summarized
as follows (see also von Hippel & von Krogh 2009):

· They are initiated by one or several users that need certain software for
intellectual, personal or business reasons. Thus, open source software
communities have no connections to companies.

· The users participate voluntarily and for free in the software development
process.

· The functioning of open source software communities is enabled by online
platforms providing specific functionalities for cooperative development of
software.

· During their existence, open source software development communities
create certain organizational and communication structures that enable an
efficient and successful coordination of all development activities as well as
management of the various software releases.

· The final product is a specific software that can be further developed and
used for free not only by members of the development community, but also
by any user and company."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)

===[[User Innovation Communities]]===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"The concept of user innovation communities was introduced by (von Hippel 2001,
2005). He introduced the term to denote user innovation communities that
function according to similar principles as open source software communities, but
are not restricted only to software or information products, but can also
incorporate user development of physical products. Thus, user innovation
communities refer to a broader phenomenon compared to open source software
communities. According to (Von Hippel 2005), user innovation communities are
defined “… as meaning nodes consisting of individuals or firms interconnected by
information transfer links which may involve face-to-face, electronic, or other
communication. These can, but need not, exist within the boundaries of a membership
group. They often do, but need not, incorporate the qualities of communities for
participants, where ‘communities’ is defined as meaning networks of interpersonal ties
that provide sociability, support, information, a sense of belonging, and social identity …”

von Hippel (2001) furthermore defines the basic preconditions necessary to be in
place for a user community to be possible: 

1) at least some users have sufficient
incentive to innovate; 

2) at least some users have an incentive to voluntarily reveal
their innovations and the means to do so; and 

3) user-led diffusion of innovation
can compete with commercial production and distribution."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


==Discussion==


===Relationship among Different Concepts of Internet-based collaborative Innovation===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:


"The phenomena of an active customer, i.e. prosumer, and the active Internet user
as the main member of the crowd as well as a participatory culture are the basic
prerequisites for Internet-based collaborative innovation. All types of Internetbased
innovation imply an opening up of the innovation processes of companies
towards contributions from outside the company. Even though the phenomena
denoted by terms related to Internet-based innovation have many similarities and
are often used in literature interchangeably, they also have differentiating
features. 

One basic difference is given by applying the criterion of who is
initiating the innovation process. 

While open innovation is mainly company-initiated,
open source software development and user innovation communities
are purely user-initiated innovation processes. 

Crowdsourcing is mainly initiated
by companies as well, but can also be initiated by users. There are also some
differentiating features among the concepts within these categories of Internet-based innovation.

The differences among open innovation and crowdsourcing, as mainly
company initiated approaches can be summarized as follows: The first is that
open innovation is applied within innovation processes, while crowdsourcing is
applied also within other processes in companies as for example marketing (see
for example Whitla, 2009). The second difference is that open innovation also
implies knowledge flows between firms while crowdsourcing refers to links
between a firm and the crowd as a large set of anonymous contributors.

According to (Schenk and Guittard, 2011) crowdsourcing can be considered “… as
a way to implement outside in knowledge flows with the crowd as a particular knowledge
provider.” Thus, it can be considered as a subset of open innovation. The third
distinguishing feature is the intensity of dependence on information and
communication (ICT) technologies. While certain forms of open innovation are
based on conventional means of communication, crowdsourcing is more
dependent on ICT as a necessary mean for attracting and hosting the activities of
the crowd and for coordinating and aggregating the contributions of a large
number of users."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


===Application Areas of Crowdsourcing: What can be crowdsourced?===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

An interesting question is what at all is crowdsourcable? Is any task or problem
suitable for crowdsourcing? Or phrased in another way, for which tasks can
companies expect a successful implementation of crowdsourcing? According to
(Schenk & Guittard 2011) in general crowdsourcing is a priori not relevant for
production tasks. They rather consider it to be relevant “… to perform information
on knowledge related tasks involving low fixed equipment costs. In general,
crowdsourcing makes it possible to mobilize competences and expertise which are
distributed among the crowd. Competence generally refers to the ability of an individual to
achieve a set of tasks.” (Schenk & Guittard 2011).

(Gassman et. al. 2010) list in their definition three types of tasks that are
subject to crowdsourcing: problem solving, idea generation and repetitive tasks.
However they do not describe the suggested types of task in more detail. A more
detailed exploration of the suitable tasks for crowdsourcing is provided by
(Schenk & Guittard 2011). According to them, crowdsourcable tasks can be
classified based on the required competences of the individuals in the crowd into
three types: simple, complex and creative tasks.
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


===Summary of Findings Regarding Crowdsourcing===

"Crowdsourcing is becoming an established process with established value chains,
platforms and procedures (Gassmann et. al. 2010). In the participatory society in
which we live today, crowdsourcing has the potential to become the usual way of
communicating with customers and users. In its basic form, crowdsourcing is
initiated by companies. It requires a well defined task or activity that is
outsourced to the crowd. Crowdsourcing is enabled by platforms on which the
contributions by the crowd can be collected, classified and evaluated. The crowd
provides ideas and evaluates them and can also creatively participate in the
implementation of the ideas. The main steps in a crowdsourcing process are to
define the problem and structure it, to publish the problem and acquire the
crowd, to collect contributions, to quality check, classify and evaluate the
contribution, to select the winners and to remunerate the contributors.
The critical success factors for crowdsourcing as it is currently applied are
the following: careful selection and clear definition of the task that needs to be
crowdsourced, acquiring the right crowd, defining a motivational and
remuneration strategy for users and an open innovation culture in the company
(see also Howe 2006 and Gassmann et. al. 2010)."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


===What are the major limitations of crowdsourcing?===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva: 

"What are the major limitations of crowdsourcing as it is defined right now?
First of all, the biggest limitation comes from the way how crowdsourcing
happens today. It is applied to already well identified and defined innovation
problems and requirements from within the companies. This means that the
specific problems that is crowdsourced stems from the company and is shaped
from the internal cognizance of the company. Many examples show that
crowdsourcing for pre-defined problems can provide very interesting and
innovative results, which companies might not have developed on their own
without the contributions from the crowd (see for example Dubach et. al. 2011 or
Bjelland and Wood 2008). However, because these solutions are oriented already
to a pre-defined problem, crowdsourcing will hardly result into disruptive, i.e.
ground breaking and radical innovation ideas that go beyond the existing
imagination of the companies. It will remain within the cognitive limits of the
internal cognizance and innovation processes. Given this, the question is how can
companies overcome this limitation? Is bottom-up crowdsourcing, without a
precisely defined problem or task possible? Furthermore, will the companies
remain the only initiators of crowdsourcing in the future?"
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)

==Typology==

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva: [http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf]


"In literature two basic approaches to classify crowdsourcing can be identified: 

1) based on the type of task that is crowdsourced. A representative classification in
this context is the classification provided by Howe (2008), and 

2) based on the initiator of crowdsourcing. A representative classification according to this
criterion is given by (Gassmann et. al. 2009). Both classifications are summarized
below."


===Classification based on task===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"The classification of Howe will be taken as starting point to relate also
classification of other authors. By applying the criteria, type of task outsourced to
the crowd, Howe (2008) classifies crowdsourcing in three main categories:

====[[Crowdsourcing Idea Game]]====

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

· The first category is '''the idea game''' which is essentially just a massive call
for ideas. 

Example: A broadly published example of an idea market is the IBM Jam
(for a detailed description see (Bjelland & Wood 2008). In 2006 IBM
initiated a global idea jam related to the question how to best use and
efficiently commercialize existing technological developments in the
company. The global ‘Innovation Jam’ took place in two three-day phases
in 2006. It involved 150,000 IBM employees, family members, business
partners, clients (from 67 companies) and university researchers.
Participants from 104 countries jammed and conversations continued 24
hours a day. In its press releases IBM described the Innovation Jam as “the
largest online brainstorming session ever”. The discussion and sourcing for
ideas was pre-structured in six major categories of emerging technologies
and each of the categories comprised several subtopics. The task of the
crowd was to brainstorm about potential new ways how technology
developed at IBM might be applied by IBM to enhance existing or develop
new products. More than 46,000 ideas were posted. Phase Two of the
Innovation Jam was devoted to ‘refining’ ideas from the first phase. The
Innovation Jam uncovered and mobilized support for substantial new
ways of using IBM technology.

This kind of crowdsourcing is considered as ‘[[Selective Crowdsourcing]]’ by
(Schenk & Guittard 2011). The company initiating the process of
crowdsourcing has to choose one solution from all solutions provided by
the crowd. Selective crowdsourcing in general implies a winner takes it all
mechanism where only the creator of the winning solution is rewarded."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


====[[Crowdsourced Problem Solving]]====

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

· "The second form is the problem solving or [[Crowd Casting Network]] in which
someone with the problem broadcasts it to a large undefined network of
potential solvers. 

For example, the shoe company ‘Fluevog’ is
crowdsourcing designs for new shoes. 

Another example is the online
platform InnoCentive on which companies can source for solutions for
scientific problems. 

These two crowdsourcing examples are also [[Selective Crowdsourcing]]. However, according to (Schenk & Guittard 2011), this type
of crowdsourcing can also be ‘integrative’ or consolidating crowdsourcing.

The goal of [[Integrative Crowdsourcing]] is to create a complete solution by
integrating complementary contributions from the crowd. An important
aspect of integrative crowdsourcing is the definition of clear interfaces
among single complementary contributions."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)

====[[Prediction Markets]]====

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

· "The third category is the prediction market or information market in which
investors from the crowd buy and sell futures related to some expected
outcome such as the presidential election or the Oscar for the best picture
(Howe, 2006). The prediction market is applied for questions related to
assessment of future scenarios (for an extensive literature review on
prediction markets see also Tziralis and Tatsiopoulos, 2007). 

One example of a prediction market is the Hollywood Stock Exchange (HSX). HSX is an
online simulation, where registered users can trade in movie stocks.
“Participants start with a total of 2 million so-called Hollywood dollars, and can
manage their portfolio by strategically buying and selling stocks” (Elberse &
Jehoshua Eliashberg 2003). HSX participants trade in movie stocks based
on their information about the star power, trailers or other advertising
products (e.g. press releases) in the prerelease period. Single movie stocks
and ranking lists of price changes on the HSX are an explicit aggregation of
the opinions of the involved HSX participants and opinion leaders. The
HSX ranking lists are an important predictor of the first weekend and
overall box-office sales of a movie."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)

===Crowdsourcing typology by initiator===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

The second representative classification of crowdsourcing approaches is provided
by (Gassmann et. al. 2010) and is based on potential initiators as classification
criteria of the crowdsourcing activities. According to these criteria, the authors
identify five different crowdsourcing approaches:

====1. Crowdsourcing initiated and supported by intermediary platforms.====

(Gassmann et. al. 2010) further divide this category of crowdsourcing in the
following subcategories: intermediary platforms for research and
development, for marketing and design, for freelancers and for idea-generation.


====2. User initiated crowdsourcing====

which is further subdivided in user websites
and open source software communities.


====3. Company initiated platforms====

which are platforms that are created and
maintained by companies. Such platforms are typically integrated within
the companies’ online activities. They are further divided in the following
subcategories: product ideas and problem solutions as well as branding
and design.


====4. Idea market places====

An example for this type of crowdsourcing is the
company Spreadshirt which allows users to design their own spreadshirt
designs and produces only those spreadshirts that are mostly liked by the
participating customers. Other such similar examples are Threadless or
CafePress.


====5. Public crowdsourcing initiatives====

that means initiatives that are similar to the
previously mentioned ones but which are initiated by public authorities.
One example mentioned by the authors (Gassmann et. al. 2010) is the ideageneration
campaign, which was initiated by the Irish government in order
to collect ideas from the population regarding the question how to achieve
higher economic growth."


===Classification based on the complexity of the task: Simple, complex and creative tasks===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"A more detailed exploration of the suitable tasks for crowdsourcing is provided by
(Schenk & Guittard 2011). According to them, crowdsourcable tasks can be
classified based on the required competences of the individuals in the crowd into
three types: simple, complex and creative tasks."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


====Simple Crowdsourcing Tasks====

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"According to (Schenk & Guittard 2011), simple tasks are easy to
describe and do not require a high cognitive effort and expertise to be understood
by a broad, anonymous mass of individuals. Moreover, their completion requires
a relatively low involvement from individuals. When simple tasks are concerned,
the added value of crowdsourcing does not stem from individual abilities but
from the low cost realization of tasks on a large scale. Therefore, financial
incentives in crowdsourcing of simple tasks do not go beyond micro payments.

An example of a simple task crowdsourcing is the [[Open Street Map]] project,
where geographic data is collected and pooled together in order to establish a
world map under the creative common license. In this project, contributions are
voluntarily and incentives may include self-benefits from the system or the
satisfaction of contributing to a public good (Schenk & Guittard 2011)."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


====Complex Crowdsourcing Tasks====

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"According to Cambell (1988), complex tasks are characterized by
the following features: multiple potential outcomes, multiple potential solution
path and presence of uncertainty. Their understanding and performance requires
special expertise, problem solving abilities and involves knowledge intensive
activities. According to (Schenk & Guittard 2011), the notion of scale does not
enter into account (as opposed to simple tasks crowdsourcing), but the firm facing
an unsolved complex problem hopes to benefit from expertise and problem
solving skills of individuals within the crowd.

Crowdsourcing of complex tasks only makes sense when the required
expertise and skills are distributed among the anonymous individuals of the
participating crowd. Thus, the required expertise and the relevant incentive
schemes are typically problem-specific. This kind of crowdsourcing typically
involves a higher remuneration. Complex tasks are related to new product
development in innovation projects where the problem solving can be regarded as
a complex process.

A specialized intermediary for crowdsourcing of complex tasks is the
platform [[InnoCentive]] (Lohse 2010). The InnoCentivee platforms is an intermediary
which on the one hand, supports companies to publish their complex tasks within
research and development activities and, on the other hand, was able to create a
Solver-Community consisting of more than 200,000 experts and scientists."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


====Creative Crowdsourcing Tasks==== 

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"Creative tasks are where creativity and uniqueness have the
highest priority. Typical examples of creative tasks are the design of logos or
similar marketing material. The main goal of a company crowdsourcing creative
tasks is not to have a problem solved but to rather benefit from the creative power
of the interdisciplinary crowd. (Schenk & Guittard 2011) suggest that regarding
creative tasks incentives or participants can be very heterogeneous, ranging from
monetary driven to passion-driven involvement. As a matter of fact, observation
of crowdsourcing platforms for creative tasks indicate that remuneration
associated with crowdsourcing of creative tasks is of an intermediate amount,
usually of a few hundred dollars (Brabham 2008, 2009).
At least one of the above described types of tasks or even all three types can be
identified in many industries."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


==Areas of Application==

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"Crowdsourcing is spreading among all
industries and there is a growing body of literature describing case studies and
crowdsourcing projects in various industries: for example, in the film industry
(Geisler, Willard et al. 2011), in the creative industries (Berthon, Pitt et al. 2008), in
retail (Dubach et al. 2011), (Friesike et al. 2010), in high tech industries (Bjelland &
Wood, 2008)."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)



===Science===

An emerging application field of crowdsourcing is also science (see Howe
2006). Several published case studies show that, data collection and analysis tasks
in different scientific disciplines can be outsourced to the crowd (Dickinson,
Zuckerberg et al. 2010). This new trend is called ‘[[Citizen Science]]’. For example,
users have proven to provide valuable contributions in the analysis of satellite
pictures with high efficiency (Fritz & McCallum et al. 2009), (Viotti et al. 2010).


===Government===

Meanwhile, crowdsourcing is applied in public hearings as well. (Brabham
2009) describes the application of crowdsourcing by the German Enquete
Kommission des Deutschen Bundestages Internet und Gesellschaft. Another
emerging application is also crisis management (Goodchild and Glennon 2010;
Zook et al. 2010)."



===Geography===

"There is a growing body of literature that describes crowdsourcing in
different industries and applications. A considerable number of articles describe
the application of crowdsourcing to the collection of geographic information. For
example the contribution of the crowd to collect and aggregate real world data
and to aggregate it in a online map system such as Openstreetmap, has proven
very helpful to quickly create a critical mass of such information (Haklay & Weber
2008)."


===Companies===

Also a considerable body of knowledge deals with the application of
crowdsourcing by companies (Vukovic 2009, La Vecchia, Cisternino et al. 2010,
Osamuyimen, David et al. 2010). Interesting in this context is the differentiation of
La Vecchia et al. 2010, who distinguish among two models of crowdsourcing: a
‘contest’ model and a ‘marketplace’ model."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)



==Players Involved in the Crowdsourcing Process==

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"The two main players in crowdsourcing are on the one side companies, who
provide the problem that needs to be crowdsourced and users, i.e. the crowd, the
individual participants that provide the solutions. As a third player, there are also
intermediaries who enable the process of crowdsourcing by providing specific
platforms and services for companies and for the users.

All three players take over different roles and tasks in the CS process." 
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)



===Company-based crowdsourcing===

"The companies typically provide the problem, which is outsourced to the crowd. 

Even though most crowdsourcing initiatives are directed towards an unknown crowd,
big globally active companies can apply crowdsourcing also within the company
and direct it to employees. With other words, global enterprises have crowds of
employees at their disposal. Involving everybody from the executive level to the
operational level represents a new form of expertise sharing and competitive
intelligence that encourages a type of informality helping to reduce existing or
perceived barriers, hierarchies and distances. 

Good '''examples''' are '''the Lufthansa wiki and Wal Mart Blog''', both calling for ideas to reduce energy consume.
In order for a company to be able to use crowdsourcing it has to have an
open innovation culture open for extant contributions into the own innovation
process. Another important aspect of the companies as a player in crowdsourcing
is also their willingness to accept the solutions as a result of the crowd activities.


Companies can apply crowdsourcing in two ways: 

1) As an ongoing activity, or 

2) as single activities that are initiated once or from time to time.

Examples for ongoing activities are Tschibo (Friesike et al. 2010), Starbucks and
others. A successful example of a single crowdsourcing activity is the idea
sourcing for the kiosk of the future of the company Valora Retail (Dubach et. al.
2011). '''Permanent crowdsourcing activities''' are typically supported by an own
platform that is set up and managed by the company itself, while single activities
are rather executed in cooperation with intermediaries."


===Intermediary crowdsourcing platforms===

"The second player which intermediates between the companies and the
crowd are specific intermediary platforms (see also Füller et. al. 2010). Examples
of such intermediary platforms are InnoCentive (Lohse 2010), Jovoto in Germany,
Atizo (Hirsing & Hirschmann 2010) and similar platforms. Intermediaries provide
the platform where companies can place their requirements while users can
provide their solutions. Depending on the type of the problem, the intermediaries
provide different kind of support, starting from helping the company to describe
the problem to different possibilities for the crowd to contribute. One of the most
important services of intermediaries regarding the crowd is also assuring that
relevant participants can contribute to a specific problem of a company. An
example in this context is Jovoto, a platform in Germany, which cultivates a crowd
of designers and other creative users and by specializing in this area, provide the
guarantee that the right crowd with right qualifications and background will
participate in the crowdsourcing endeavor. At the same time, the platform
provides the necessary tools and instruments for the users in order to enable an
efficient participation. This basically means registration possibilities, then search
for requests by companies, different kind of design tools for contributions, then
different possibilities for communication among the crowd, evaluation of content
and similar. With this, the intermediaries play an important role, in particular
providing opportunities for crowdsourcing also to companies that don't embrace
this as a continuous process but from time to time use it in order to solve very
specific problems. Some companies have created their own platform as for
example Migipedia, the crowdsourcing platform of the retailer Migros in
Switzerland."


===The crowd===

"The third and most important player in crowdsourcing is the crowd. In the
literature the need to attract the right crowd has been stressed as one important
key success factor (see for example Howe 2006). For example in case of
crowdsourcing of design tasks, a higher potential for getting interesting results is
by having a high number of representatives which have a creative background
(see also Howe 2006). In this context one important role is played also by
intermediaries that are able to attract crowds with specific background. See for
example: Jovoto.com a crowdsourcing platform for designers.

Further aspects that are considered as important and related to the users are:

· Are the members of the crowd known to each other and can they see each
other's contributions? For some types of crowdsourcing as for example
prediction or information market, the analysis of the user behavior has
shown that the results are better if members of the crowd don't know each
other and cannot see the contributions of others’ (see Howe 2006).

· Motivation to participate is also an important aspect broadly discussed in
literature see for example (Brabham 2008, Brabham 2009), (Kleemenn et. al.
2008). (Proulx, Heaton et al. 2011) discuss the conflict among self
responsibility, an empowerment of the user and the need to follow the
rules of a platform."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)


==The Crowdsourcing Process==

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"Existing literature delivers various attempts to give an overview of
crowdsourcing related processes identifying and analysing the underlying
characteristics. 

Malone et al. (2010) adopted a biological metaphor determining
the genome of collective intelligence systems as the combination of building
blocks he refers to as genes. Thus, he delivers an instrument to characterize real
examples. 

Geiger et al. (2011) developed a taxonomy framework of
crowdsourcing partitioning the process in five phases from the preselection of
contribution to the remuneration. Different combinations of process
characteristics describe single different crowdsourcing examples. 

Doan et al(2011) identified nine dimensions related to crowdsourcing. An aggregated view
on the crowdsourcing process is provided by (Gassmann et. al. 2010), who
consider '''5 steps: 1) Preparation, 2) Initiation; 3) Execution; 4) Evaluation; and 5) Exploitation'''.

Before the company can start with the specific crowdsourcing processes, a
strategic decision has to be taken to crowdsource or not. Companies have to
evaluate if crowdsourcing is suitable for identified tasks and problems and if it
can be integrated in their existing innovation as well as research and development
processes. 

In case a positive decision is taken in favor of crowdsourcing, further
aspects that need to be clarified are as follows:

1. What are the tasks and problems that crowdsourcing is going to be applied
for and is crowdsourcing going to be an ongoing activity or just single
projects from time to time?

2. Is an own crowdsourcing platform justifiable or rather the cooperation
with an intermediary the right solution?
Based on the strategic decisions above, the specific crowdsourcing policy and
governance framework for a company is created. In context of this framework,
single crowdsourcing processes take place."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)



===Five Processes===

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"According to (Gassman et. al. 2010), the specific activities in the five
processes phases of crowdsourcing can be summarized as follows:


====Preparation====

· In the preparation phase, the problem or task is identified that is going to
be crowdsourced. Furthermore, necessary contracts with intermediaries are
defined.


====Initiation====


· In the initiation phase of the crowdsourcing process, all preparation
activities take place. The concrete wording of the description of the task or
problem is defined (see for example Dubach et. al. 2011), the evaluation
criteria and procedures are selected, the online publication is prepared and
eventually a crowdsourcing platform is developed and set up, and further
awareness creating activity are identified and prepared.


====Execution====

· In the execution phase the requests by the company is published and the
crowd provides their solution proposals. The company might provide
support in form of: clarification, answers to participants' questions and
other kind of support to the participating individuals (see for example
Dubach et. al. 2011). In this phase, a critical success factor is also the
prevention of malfunction and misuse of the platform. Furthermore, an
intensive quality control is necessary (see for example O'Neil 2010, and
Giles 2005).


====Evaluation====

· After all contributions are collected, they are assessed and evaluated by the
company in the evaluation phase. Depending on the number of
contributions, this can be a resource and zime consuming process. Thus,
the availability of sufficient resources inb the company is a critical success
factor (Dubach et. al. 2011). The evaluation phase ends with the selection of
the winning contribution of the crowd and the remuneration of the
winners.


====Exploitation====

· In the exploitation phase, the company translates the solution provided by
the crowd in products, services and/or their features and involves them to
the innovation and implementation process."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf)





[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]