'''* Article: The State of Free Culture, 2011. Felix Stalder. Kosmos Journal, Spring/Summer Issue, 2011.'''

URL = http://felix.openflows.com/pdf/FreeCulture_Kosmos_full.pdf [http://felix.openflows.com/pdf/KOSMOS_SS2011_Stalder.pdf]


=Description=

"The [[Free Culture Forum]] released the [[Declaration on Sustainable Models for Creativity in the Digital Age]] in February 2011 following their second Forum in Barcelona in October 2010. This loose global network of artists, cultural producers, political activists and scholars is spearheading a movement to enable culture to be free for all to express and enjoy and to prevent it from being enclosed through copyright and other regulations that are preventing access to what should be a cultural commons.

    
In this text, I will assess the state of free culture today by first locating it within the broader movement for the digital commons. I will then look at the first two phases of free culture which centered around technological and legal issues. This sets the context to assess the current phase of economic and institutional experimentation.

The full article is [http://felix.openflows.com/pdf/FreeCulture_Kosmos_full.pdf here]. A substantially shortened, but nicely lay-outed version is [http://felix.openflows.com/pdf/KOSMOS_SS2011_Stalder.pdf here] (pdf, 8.8.MB), as published in the Spring|Summer issue of the Komsos Journal."
(http://felix.openflows.com/node/182)


=Excerpt=

Felix Stalder, '''Towards Institutions of the Commons''':


Even if we just consider the three models mentioned above, it becomes
clear that the challenge of Free Culture goes far beyond
simply sticking a free license to a work and publishing it online.
Free culture is not a niche, but the culture native to digital communication
networks. To exorcise sharing and reuse from our
contemporary environment, draconian measures (‘war on sharing’)
could be adopted that would be, in effect, indistinguishable
from totalitarian censorship. To prevent this from happening and
to realize the potential for a renewal of democratic culture, we
need new institutions that are capable of sustaining new cultural
practices—based on sharing, reuse and cooperative production—
on all scales, from the very small and quotidian to the very large
and exceptional. This involves both the removal of existing blockages
and the creation of new models, platforms and institutions
that channel the creative energies inherent in all human beings
into socially constructive and thus sustainable directions.

Crowd-funding shows that the ‘audience’ can be included from
the beginning and that it can play an active role.Their desire to
see a work actualized can be a force to make it happen. And while
there is money involved, the relationships created are not shaped
through the commercial market and do not conform to its social
model of narrowly self-interested actors. Thus the problem of financing
the first copy can be solved without the need to revert to
copyright based controls. The models of distributed value creation
highlight the fact that there can be balance between the financial
interests of creators of large commercial social platforms and the
users who make them valuable. While the YouTube model is
clearly limited in its reliance on advertisement, it is a first step in
the right direction and shows that access-based financing can be
combined with free and unlimited access. The debates around the
flat-rate indicate that legal and institutional frameworks need to
be adapted. This cannot be done without deeply engaging with
the political system on all levels. However—and this is my personal
view—at the moment, all the Free Culture movement is capable
of doing is helping prevent the worst legislation from being
passed. It is not yet in a position to pro-actively shape new regulation.
At the moment, bottom-up approaches are more promising,
even if we acknowledge that they are structurally limited. It’s
not an either-or question, rather it is an assessment of where our
current strengths are today."
(http://felix.openflows.com/pdf/KOSMOS_SS2011_Stalder.pdf)

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Culture]]