
'''* Article: DE(CONSTRUCTING)	THE REFUGEES’	RIGHT	TO	THE	 CITY:	STATE-RUN	CAMPS	VERSUS	COMMONING	 PRACTICES	IN	ATHENS, THESSALONIKI	AND	 MYTILENE CHARALAMPOS	TSAVDAROGLOU,	CHRΙSA	GIANNOPOULOU,	OLGA	LAFAZANI,	ILIAS	PISTIKOS,	CHRISTY	 ETROPOULOU. By  Charalampos	Tsavdaroglou,	,	Chrisa	Giannopoulou,	,	Olga	Lafazani,	et al.'''

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Charalampos_Tsavdaroglou/publication/335947541_Deconstructing_the_Refugees'_Right_to_the_City_State-run_camps_versus_commoning_practices_in_Athens_Thessaloniki_and_Mytilene/links/5d84f6e4458515cbd1a3a1d6/Deconstructing-the-Refugees-Right-to-the-City-State-run-camps-versus-commoning-practices-in-Athens-Thessaloniki-and-Mytilene.pdf

=Abstract=

"A	noticeable	body	of	literature	since	the	1980s	has	been	exploring	aspects	of	social	philanthropy,	NGOs’	activities	
and	State	immigration	policies.	However,	little	research	is	available	on	how	the	refugees	themselves	self-organize,	 claim	the	right	to	the	city	and	enact	the	production	of	collective	housing	common	spaces.	This	paper	aims	to	
discuss	such	issues	and	contribute	to	this	gap.

Following	the	recent	spatial	approaches	on	“commons”	and	“enclosures”	the	paper	compares	and contrasts	
refugee	led	solidarity	housing	commons	with	State-run	refugee	camps.	According	to	the	critical	thinkers	of	
“autonomy	of	migration”	the	focus	has	to	be	shifted	from	the	apparatuses	of	control	to	the	multiple	and	diverse	 ways	in	which	migration	responds	to,	operates	independently	from,	and	in	turn	shapes	those	apparatuses	and	
their	corresponding	institutions	and	practices.	Moreover	the	paper	is	inspired	by	the	Lefebvrian	“right	to	the	city”	 which	embodies	the	rights	to	housing,	work,	education,	health	and	culture	and	challenges	the	notion	of	the	citizen.	

In	Lefebvrian	thought,	citizenship	is	not	defined	by	membership	in	the	nation-state,	but	is	based	on	membership	in	 inhabitance.	Consequently	the	newcomers’	mobile	commons	contest	State	immigration	policies	and	claim	spatial	
justice.	

The	paper	focuses	empirically	on	Greece,	which	is	situated	at	the	epicentre	of	the	refugee	crisis,	and	in	Athens,	 Thessaloniki	and	Mytilene	in	particular.	Mytilene	is	the	capital	of	Lesvos	Island	i.e.	the	main	refugee	entrance	point	 in	the	East,	close	to	the	Turkish	coastline.	Athens	is	the	capital	of	Greece	where	more	than	ten	State-run	camps	in	 the	outskirts	of	the	city	and	several	refugee	squatted	buildings	in	the	center	of	the	city	establish	a	dialectic	 contrast.	Finally,	Thessaloniki	was	the	city	with	the	highest	ratio	of	refugees	per	residents	across	the	EU	during	 2016.

For	the	purposes	of	the	paper	social	data	were	collected	from	both	qualitative	and	quantitative	processes;	a	
methodological	tool,	which	is	applied	for	the	determination	of	these	dynamic	characteristics	approved	by	
participatory	research,	ethnographic	analysis,	semi-structured	interviews,	discourse	analysis	and	collection	of	
articles	of	local	press	and	web	pages."
(https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Charalampos_Tsavdaroglou/publication/335947541_Deconstructing_the_Refugees'_Right_to_the_City_State-run_camps_versus_commoning_practices_in_Athens_Thessaloniki_and_Mytilene/links/5d84f6e4458515cbd1a3a1d6/Deconstructing-the-Refugees-Right-to-the-City-State-run-camps-versus-commoning-practices-in-Athens-Thessaloniki-and-Mytilene.pdf)

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Greece]]