
'''* Report: Peña-López, I. (2017). State of the Art: Spain. Voice or chatter? Using a Structuration Framework Towards a Theory of ICT-mediated Citizen Engagement. Bengaluru: IT for Change.'''

URL = http://ictlogy.net/20170228-report-state-of-the-art-spain-voice-or-chatter-using-a-structuration-framework-towards-a-theory-of-ict-mediated-citizen-engagement/


=Description=

Ismael Pena-Lopez:

"This report aims at providing an overview of the normative and institutional state of art of ICT-mediated citizen participation in Spain. The first section provides an overview of the political and civic liberties framework in Spain. In the second section the landscape of ICT mediated citizen engagement is mapped. In the third section, the report engages with implications of technology mediations for deliberative democracy and transformative citizenship.

This report is the outcome of a collaboration between IT for Change and Ismael Peña-López, School of Law and Political Science, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya under a research project titled Voice or Chatter? Using a Structuration Framework Towards a Theory of ICTmediated Citizen Engagement.

The State of the Art reports provide an overview of the normative and institutional state of art of ICT-mediated citizen participation in various countries. They provide an overview of the political and civic liberties framework, the landscape of ICT-mediated citizen engagement; and delve into the implications of technology mediations for deliberative democracy and transformative citizenship."
(http://ictlogy.net/20170228-report-state-of-the-art-spain-voice-or-chatter-using-a-structuration-framework-towards-a-theory-of-ict-mediated-citizen-engagement/)


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Democracy]]

[[Category:Participation]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Spain]]