'''= "A state of exception is a situation where the law is suspended or overridden by the sovereign power".''' ([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RmPoALlyKAKFJECDYYNa43NuzY9cOs9JfiEJiOXjxLE/edit])

Also a book by Giorgio Agamben.


=Concept=


'''1. From the Wikipedia:'''

"A state of exception (German: Ausnahmezustand) is a concept introduced in the 1920s by the German philosopher and jurist Carl Schmitt, similar to a state of emergency (martial law) but based in the sovereign's ability to transcend the rule of law in the name of the public good.

..

Schmitt introduced the concept of “state of emergency” in his 1921 essay On Dictatorship, influenced by what he saw as the weakness of the Weimar Constitution and the necessity of a strong ruler. In his later essay Political Theology he defined political sovereignty as, essentially, the ability to ignore the law, and that this was necessary given the unforeseeable nature of emergencies. "In Schmitt's terms," Masha Gessen wrote in Surviving Autocracy (2020), when an emergency "shakes up the accepted order of things...the sovereign steps forward and institutes new, extralegal rules."

This concept is developed in Giorgio Agamben's book State of Exception (2005)[3] and Achille Mbembe's Ne cropolitics (2019).Agamben investigates how the state of exception can become extended, for instance how the United States treated prisoners captured during the "war on terror", and Mbembe describes how the state of exception can be used to reduce people to precarity and justify violence and killing.

It can be either grounded upon autonomous sources of law (like international treaties) or featured as external to the juridical order."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_of_exception)


'''2. [[Blockchain Technology and Polycentric Governance]]:'''

"The concept of “state of exception” in legal and political theory is most prominently associated with the work of Carl Schmitt, a German legal and political theorist. Schmitt introduced and extensively discussed this concept in his 1922 book, “Political Theology” (Schmitt 2014). The author defined the “state of exception” as a situation where the sovereign power suspends or overrides the law. In such a state, the sovereign can transcend the rule of law, particularly in times of crisis or perceived existential threats. The idea that the “sovereign is he who decides on the exception is central to Schmitt’s concept.” This tenet meant that the ultimate power in a political system was the ability to decide when the “ordinary” legal order could be disregarded. The concept of “state of exception” has been further explored and critiqued by other scholars, most notably Giorgio Agamben, an Italian philosopher who expanded on Schmitt’s ideas in his own work, critically examining the implications of such a state for civil liberties and the rule of law. Agamben’s exploration (2005) delves into how states of exception have been historically used to suspend constitutional rights and justify authoritarian measures.

While the concept of “state of exception” was developed with monocentric nation-states in mind, which operate through coercive, centralized authorities that monopolize violence, it certainly can apply to polycentric governance as well. In this case, a “state of exception” poses significant direct challenges to two of the core attributes of polycentricity presented by Aligica and Tarko (2012). Firstly, it would partly or totally suspend the institutional framework that encompasses polycentric systems. Secondly, it would reduce the relative autonomy of the multiple decision-making centers by having a central authority decide on the “exception.”


=The Book=

'''* Book: State of Exception. Giorgio Agamben.'''

From the Wikipedia:

"In this book, Agamben traces the concept of 'state of exception' (Ausnahmezustand) used by Carl Schmitt to Roman justitium and auctoritas. This leads him to a response to Carl Schmitt's definition of sovereignty as the power to proclaim the exception.

Agamben's text State of Exception investigates the increase of power by governments which they employ in supposed times of crisis. Within a state of emergency, Agamben refers to the states of exception, where constitutional rights can be diminished, superseded and rejected in the process of claiming this extension of power by a government.

The state of exception invests one person or government with the power and voice of authority over others extended well beyond where the law has existed in the past. "In every case, the state of exception marks a threshold at which logic and praxis blur with each other and a pure violence without logos claims to realize an enunciation without any real reference" (Agamben, pg 40). Agamben refers a continued state of exception to the Nazi state of Germany under Hitler's rule. "The entire Third Reich can be considered a state of exception that lasted twelve years. In this sense, modern totalitarianism can be defined as the establishment, by means of the state of exception, of a legal civil war that allows for the physical elimination not only of political adversaries but of entire categories of citizens who for some reason cannot be integrated into the political system" (Agamben, p. 2).

The political power over others acquired through the state of exception, places one government—or one form or branch of government—as all powerful, operating outside the laws. During such times of extension of power, certain forms of knowledge shall be privileged and accepted as true and certain voices shall be heard as valued, while of course, many others are not. This oppressive distinction holds great importance in relation to the production of knowledge. The process of both acquiring knowledge, and suppressing certain knowledge, is a violent act within a time of crisis.

Agamben's State of Exception investigates how the suspension of laws within a state of emergency or crisis can become a prolonged state of being. More specifically, Agamben addresses how this prolonged state of exception operates to deprive individuals of their citizenship. When speaking about the military order issued by President George W. Bush on 13 November 2001, Agamben writes, "What is new about President Bush's order is that it radically erases any legal status of the individual, thus producing a legally unnameable and unclassifiable being. Not only do the Taliban captured in Afghanistan not enjoy the status of POW's (prisoner of war) as defined by the Geneva Convention, they do not even have the status of people charged with a crime according to American laws" (Agamben, pg 3). 780 Taliban and Al-Qaeda fighters in Afghanistan were held at Guantánamo Bay without trial.[42] These individuals were termed "enemy combatants." Until 7 July 2006, these individuals had been treated outside the Geneva Conventions by the United States administration.


==Discussion==

===Auctoritas, "charisma" and Führertum doctrine===

Agamben shows that auctoritas and potestas are clearly distinct – although they form together a binary system".[43] He quotes Mommsen, who explains that auctoritas is "less than an order and more than an advice".[44]

While potestas derives from social function, auctoritas "immediately derives from the patres personal condition". As such, it is akin to Max Weber's concept of charisma. This is why the tradition ordered, at the king's death, the creation of the sovereign's wax-double in the funus imaginarium, as Ernst Kantorowicz demonstrated in The King's Two Bodies (1957). Hence, it is necessary to distinguish two bodies of the sovereign in order to assure the continuity of dignitas (term used by Kantorowicz, here a synonym of auctoritas). Moreover, in the person detaining auctoritas—the sovereign—public life and private life have become inseparable. Augustus, the first Roman emperor who claimed auctoritas as the basis of princeps status in a famous passage of Res Gestae, had opened up his house to public eyes. In his theorization of thanatopolitics (the politics of death), Agamben uses the English and Roman examples to show how the sovereign justifies authority by his claimed ability to control or manage his own death.[45]: xi–xii  Agamben writes that the rituals of two deaths by the sovereign (as an ordinary human and then as effigy) demonstrate that death rituals show the people that the sovereign is in control of both lives.[45]: xii 

The concept of auctoritas played a key-role in fascism and Nazism, in particular concerning Carl Schmitt's theories, argues Agamben:

To understand modern phenomena such as the fascist Duce or the Nazi Führer, it is important not to forget their continuity with the principle of auctoritas principis {Agamben refers here to Augustus's Res Gestae}. ...Neither does the Duce nor the Führer represent constitutionally defined public charges – even though Mussolini and Hitler endorsed respectively the charge of head of government and Reich's chancellor, just as Augustus endorsed the imperium consulare or the potestas tribunicia. The Duce's or the Führer's qualities are immediately related to the physical person and belong to the biopolitical tradition of auctoritas and not to the juridical tradition of potestas.

Thus, Agamben opposes Foucault's concept of "biopolitics" to right (law), as he defines the state of exception, in Homo sacer, as the inclusion of life by right under the figure of "ex-ception", which is simultaneously inclusion and exclusion. Following Walter Benjamin's lead, he explains that our task would be to radically differentiate "pure violence" from right, instead of tying them together, as did Carl Schmitt.

Agamben concludes his chapter on "Auctoritas and potestas" writing:

- It is significative that modern specialists were so inclined to admit that auctoritas was inherent to the living person of the pater or the princeps. What was evidently an ideology or a fictio aiming to be the groundwork of auctoritas' preeminence or, at least, specific rank compared to potestas thus became a figure of right's {"droit"} immanence to life. ... Although it is evident that there can't be an eternal human type that would incarnate itself each time in Augustus, Napoleon, Hitler, but only more or less comparable ("semblables") mechanisms {"dispositif", a term often used by Foucault} – the state of exception, justitium, the auctoritas principis, the Führertum -, put in use in more or less different circumstances, in the 1930s – overall, but not only – in Germany, the power that Weber had defined as "charismatic" is related to the concept of auctoritas and elaborated in a Führertum doctrine as the original and personal power of a leader. In 1933, in a short article intending to define the fundamental concepts of national-socialism, Schmitt defines the Führung principle (sic!) by the "root identity between the leader and his entourage".{"identité de souche entre le chef et son entourage"}

Agamben's thoughts on the state of emergency leads him to declare that the difference between dictatorship and democracy is thin indeed,or even ontologically non-existent, as rule by decree became more and more common, starting from World War I and the reorganization of constitutional balance. Agamben often reminds that Hitler never abrogated the Weimar Constitution: he suspended it for the duration of the Third Reich with the Reichstag Fire Decree, issued on 28 February 1933. Indefinite suspension of law is what characterizes the state of exception."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giorgio_Agamben#State_of_Exception_(2005))


=Discussion=

==Paolo Virno==

" I believe that the concept of “institution” is also (and perhaps mainly) decisive to the politics of the multitude. Institutions constitute the way in which our species protects itself from uncertainty and with which it create rules to protect its own praxis. Therefore, an institution is also a collective, such as Chto delat/What is to be done?2 Institution is the mother tongue. Institutions are the rituals we use to heal and resolve the crisis of a community. The true debate should not be between institutional and anti-institutional forces; instead, it should identify the institutions that lay beyond the “monopoly of the political decision” incarnated by the State. It should single out the institutions that meet the “general intellect” referred by Marx, that “social brain” that is, at the same time, the main productive force and a principle of republican organization.

The modern central state is facing a radical crisis, but it has not ceased to reproduce itself through a series of disturbing metamorphoses. The “state of permanent exception” is surely one of the ways in which sovereignty survives itself, indefinitely postponing its decline. The same applies to what Marx said about joint-stock companies: these constituted “an overtaking of private property operated on the same basis of private property.” To put it differently, joint-stock companies allowed the overcoming of private property but, at the same time, articulated this possibility in such a way that they qualitatively reinforced and developed that same private property. In our case, we could say: the state of permanent exception indicates an overcoming of the form of the State on the same basis of its “statuality.” It is a perpetuation of the State, of sovereignty, but also the exhibition of its irreversible crisis, of the full maturity of a no longer statal republic.

So, I believe that the “state of exception” allows us to reflect on the institutions of the multitude, about their possible functioning and their rules. An example: in the “state of exception”, the difference between “matters of right” (de jure) and “matters of fact” (de facto) is so attenuated that it almost disappears. Once more, the rules become empirical data that can even acquire a normative power. Now, this relative distinction between norms and facts that nowadays produces special laws and such prisons as Guantanamo can suffer an alternative declension, becoming a “constitutional” principle of the public sphere of the multitude. The decisive point is that the norm should exhibit not only the possibility of returning into the ambit of facts, but also to its factual origin. In short, it should exhibit its revocability and its substitutability; each rule should present itself as both a unit of measure of the praxis and as something that should continuously be re-evaluated."

(http://www.mediationsjournal.org/articles/the-soviets-of-the-multitude) 


==Giorgio Agambem==

http://www.press.uchicago.edu/Misc/Chicago/009254.html

A Brief History of the State of Exception, by Giorgio Agamben

An excerpt from State of Exception [http://www.press.uchicago.edu/Misc/Chicago/009254.html]

"We have already seen how the state of siege had its origin in France
during the Revolution. After being established with the Constituent
Assembly's decree of July 8, 1791, it acquired its proper physiognomy as
état de siège fictif or état de siège politique with the Directorial law
of August 27, 1797, and, finally, with Napoleon's decree of December 24,
1811. The idea of a suspension of the constitution (of the "rule of the
constitution") had instead been introduced, as we have also seen, by the
Constitution of 22 Frimaire Year 8. Article 14 of the Charte of 1814
granted the sovereign the power to "make the regulations and ordinances
necessary for the execution of the laws and the security of the State";
because of the vagueness of the formula, Chateaubriand observed "that it
is possible that one fine morning the whole Charte will be forfeited for
the benefit of Article 14." The state of siege was expressly mentioned
in the Acte additionel to the Constitution of April 22, 1815, which
stated that it could only be declared with a law. Since then, moments of
constitutional crisis in France over the course of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries have been marked by legislation on the state of
siege. After the fall of the July Monarchy, a decree by the Constituent
Assembly on June 24, 1848, put Paris in a state of siege and assigned
General Cavaignac the task of restoring order in the city. Consequently,
an article was included in the new constitution of November 4, 1848,
establishing that the occasions, forms, and effects of the state of
siege would be firmly set by a law. From this moment on, the dominant
principle in the French tradition (though, as we will see, not without
exceptions) has been that the power to suspend the laws can belong only
to the same power that produces them, that is, parliament (in contrast
to the German tradition, which entrusted this power to the head of
state). The law of August 9, 1849 (which was partially restricted later
by the law of April 4, 1878), consequently established that a political
state of siege could be declared by parliament (or, additionally, by the
head of state) in the case of imminent danger to external or internal
security. Napoleon III had recourse several times to this law and, once
installed in power, he transferred, in the constitution of January 1852,
the exclusive power to proclaim a state of siege to the head of state.

The Franco-Prussian War and the insurrection of the Commune coincided
with an unprecedented generalization of the state of exception, which
was proclaimed in forty departments and lasted in some of them until
1876. On the basis of these experiences, and after MacMahon's failed
coup d'état in May 1877, the law of 1849 was modified to establish that
a state of siege could be declared only with a law (or, if the Chamber
of Deputies was not in session, by the head of state, who was then
obligated to convene parliament within two days) in the event of
"imminent danger resulting from foreign war or armed insurrection" (law
of April 3, 1878, Art. 1).

World War One coincided with a permanent state of exception in the
majority of the warring countries. On August 2, 1914, President Poincaré
issued a decree that put the entire country in a state of siege, and
this decree was converted into law by parliament two days later. The
state of siege remained in force until October 12, 1919. Although the
activity of parliament, which was suspended during the first six months
of the war, recommenced in January 1915, many of the laws passed were,
in truth, pure and simple delegations of legislative power to the
executive, such as the law of February 10, 1918, which granted the
government an all but absolute power to regulate by decree the
production and trade of foodstuffs. As Tingsten has observed, in this
way the executive power was transformed into a legislative organ in the
material sense of the term. In any case, it was during this period that
exceptional legislation by executive [governativo] decree (which is now
perfectly familiar to us) became a regular practice in the European
democracies.

Predictably, the expansion of the executive's powers into the
legislative sphere continued after the end of hostilities, and it is
significant that military emergency now ceded its place to economic
emergency (with an implicit assimilation between war and economics). In
January 1924, at a time of serious crisis that threatened the stability
of the franc, the Poincaré government asked for full powers over
financial matters. After a bitter debate, in which the opposition
pointed out that this was tantamount to parliament renouncing its own
constitutional powers, the law was passed on March 22, with a four-month
limit on the government's special powers. Analogous measures were
brought to a vote in 1935 by the Laval government, which issued more
than five hundred decrees "having force of law" in order to avoid the
devaluation of the franc. The opposition from the left, led by Léon
Blum, strongly opposed this "fascist" practice, but it is significant
that once the Left took power with the Popular Front, it asked
parliament in June 1937 for full powers in order to devalue the franc,
establish exchange control, and impose new taxes. As has been observed,
this meant that the new practice of legislation by executive
[governativo] decree, which had been inaugurated during the war, was by
now a practice accepted by all political sides. On June 30, 1937, the
powers that had been denied Blum were granted to the Chautemps
government, in which several key ministries were entrusted to
nonsocialists. And on April 10, 1938, Édouard Daladier requested and
obtained from parliament exceptional powers to legislate by decree in
order to cope with both the threat of Nazi Germany and the economic
crisis. It can therefore be said that until the end of the Third
Republic "the normal procedures of parliamentary democracy were in a
state of suspension." When we study the birth of the so-called
dictatorial regimes in Italy and Germany, it is important not to forget
this concurrent process that transformed the democratic constitutions
between the two world wars. Under the pressure of the paradigm of the
state of exception, the entire politico-constitutional life of Western
societies began gradually to assume a new form, which has perhaps only
today reached its full development. In December 1939, after the outbreak
of the war, the Daladier government obtained the power to take by decree
all measures necessary to ensure the defense of the nation. Parliament
remained in session (except when it was suspended for a month in order
to deprive the communist parliamentarians of their immunity), but all
legislative activity lay firmly in the hands of the executive. By the
time Marshal Pétain assumed power, the French parliament was a shadow of
itself. Nevertheless, the Constitutional Act of July 11, 1940, granted
the head of state the power to proclaim a state of siege throughout the
entire national territory (which by then was partially occupied by the
German army).

In the present constitution, the state of exception is regulated by
Article 16, which De Gaulle had proposed. The article establishes that
the president of the Republic may take all necessary measures "when the
institutions of the Republic, the independence of the Nation, the
integrity of its territory, or the execution of its international
commitments are seriously and immediately threatened and the regular
functioning of the constitutional public powers is interrupted." In
April 1961, during the Algerian crisis, De Gaulle had recourse to
Article 16 even though the functioning of the public powers had not been
interrupted. Since that time, Article 16 has never again been invoked,
but, in conformity with a continuing tendency in all of the Western
democracies, the declaration of the state of exception has gradually
been replaced by an unprecedented generalization of the paradigm of
security as the normal technique of government.



The history of Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution is so tightly woven
into the history of Germany between the wars that it is impossible to
understand Hitler's rise to power without first analyzing the uses and
abuses of this article in the years between 1919 and 1933. Its immediate
precedent was Article 68 of the Bismarckian Constitution, which, in
cases where "public security was threatened in the territory of the
Reich," granted the emperor the power to declare a part of the Reich to
be in a state of war (Kriegszustand), whose conditions and limitations
followed those set forth in the Prussian law of June 4, 1851, concerning
the state of siege. Amid the disorder and rioting that followed the end
of the war, the deputies of the National Assembly that was to vote on
the new constitution (assisted by jurists among whom the name of Hugo
Preuss stands out) included an article that granted the president of the
Reich extremely broad emergency [eccezionali] powers. The text of
Article 48 reads, "If security and public order are seriously
[erheblich] disturbed or threatened in the German Reich, the president
of the Reich may take the measures necessary to reestablish security and
public order, with the help of the armed forces if required. To this end
he may wholly or partially suspend the fundamental rights [Grundrechte]
established in Articles 114, 115, 117, 118, 123, 124, and 153." The
article added that a law would specify in detail the conditions and
limitations under which this presidential power was to be exercised.
Since that law was never passed, the president's emergency [eccezionali]
powers remained so indeterminate that not only did theorists regularly
use the phrase "presidential dictatorship" in reference to Article 48,
but in 1925 Schmitt could write that "no constitution on earth had so
easily legalized a coup d'état as did the Weimar Constitution."

Save for a relative pause between 1925 and 1929, the governments of the
Republic, beginning with Brüning's, made continual use of Article 48,
proclaiming a state of exception and issuing emergency decrees on more
than two hundred and fifty occasions; among other things, they employed
it to imprison thousands of communist militants and to set up special
tribunals authorized to pronounce capital sentences. On several
occasions, particularly in October 1923, the government had recourse to
Article 4 to cope with the fall of the mark, thus confirming the modern
tendency to conflate politico-military and economic crises.

It is well known that the last years of the Weimar Republic passed
entirely under a regime of the state of exception; it is less obvious to
note that Hitler could probably not have taken power had the country not
been under a regime of presidential dictatorship for nearly three years
and had parliament been functioning. In July 1930, the Brüning
government was put in the minority, but Brüning did not resign. Instead,
President Hindenburg granted him recourse to Article 48 and dissolved
the Reichstag. From that moment on, Germany in fact ceased to be a
parliamentary republic. Parliament met only seven times for no longer
than twelve months in all, while a fluctuating coalition of Social
Democrats and centrists stood by and watched a government that by then
answered only to the president of the Reich. In 1932,
Hindenburg—reelected president over Hitler and Thälmann—forced Brüning
to resign and named the centrist von Papen to his post. On June 4, the
Reichstag was dissolved and never reconvened until the advent of Nazism.
On July 20, a state of exception was proclaimed in the Prussian
territory, and von Papen was named Reich Commissioner for
Prussia—ousting Otto Braun's Social Democratic government.

The state of exception in which Germany found itself during the
Hindenburg presidency was justified by Schmitt on a constitutional level
by the idea that the president acted as the "guardian of the
constitution;" but the end of the Weimar Republic clearly demonstrates
that, on the contrary, a "protected democracy" is not a democracy at
all, and that the paradigm of constitutional dictatorship functions
instead as a transitional phase that leads inevitably to the
establishment of a totalitarian regime.

Given these precedents, it is understandable that the constitution of
the Federal Republic did not mention the state of exception.
Nevertheless, on June 24, 1968, the "great coalition" of Christian
Democrats and Social Democrats passed a law for the amendment of the
constitution (Gesetz zur Ergänzung des Grundgesetzes) that reintroduced
the state of exception (defined as the "state of internal necessity,"
innere Notstand). However, with an unintended irony, for the first time
in the history of the institution, the proclamation of the state of
exception was provided for not simply to safeguard public order and
security, but to defend the "liberal-democratic constitution." By this
point, protected democracy had become the rule.


On August 3, 1914, the Swiss Federal Assembly granted the Federal
Council "the unlimited power to take all measures necessary to guarantee
the security, integrity, and neutrality of Switzerland." This unusual
act—by virtue of which a non-warring state granted powers to the
executive that were even vaster and vaguer than those received by the
governments of countries directly involved in the war—is of interest
because of the debates it provoked both in the assembly itself and in
the Swiss Federal Court when the citizens objected that the act was
unconstitutional. The tenacity with which on this occasion the Swiss
jurists (nearly thirty years ahead of the theorists of constitutional
dictatorship) sought (like Waldkirch and Burckhardt) to derive the
legitimacy of the state of exception from the text of the constitution
itself (specifically, Article 2, which read, "the aim of the
Confederation is to ensure the independence of the fatherland against
the foreigner [and] to maintain internal tranquility and order"), or
(like Hoerni and Fleiner) to ground the state of exception in a law of
necessity "inherent in the very existence of the State," or (like His)
in a juridical lacuna that the exceptional provisions must fill, shows
that the theory of the state of exception is by no means the exclusive
legacy of the antidemocratic tradition.



In Italy the history and legal situation of the state of exception are
of particular interest with regard to legislation by emergency executive
[governativi] decrees (the so-called law-decrees). Indeed, from this
viewpoint one could say that Italy functioned as a true and proper
juridico-political laboratory for organizing the process (which was also
occurring to differing degrees in other European states) by which the
law-decree "changed from a derogatory and exceptional instrument for
normative production to an ordinary source for the production of law".
But this also means that one of the essential paradigms through which
democracy is transformed from parliamentary to executive
[governamentale] was elaborated precisely by a state whose governments
were often unstable. In any case, it is in this context that the
emergency decree's pertinence to the problematic sphere of the state of
exception comes clearly into view. The Albertine Statute (like the
current Republican Constitution) made no mention of the state of
exception. Nevertheless, the governments of the kingdom resorted to
proclaiming a state of siege many times: in Palermo and the Sicilian
provinces in 1862 and 1866, in Naples in 1862, in Sicily and Lunigiana
in 1894, and in Naples and Milan in 1898, where the repression of the
disturbances was particularly bloody and provoked bitter debates in
parliament. The declaration of a state of siege on the occasion of the
earthquake of Messina and Reggio Calabria on December 28, 1908 is only
apparently a different situation. Not only was the state of siege
ultimately proclaimed for reasons of public order—that is, to suppress
the robberies and looting provoked by the disaster—but from a
theoretical standpoint, it is also significant that these acts furnished
the occasion that allowed Santi Romano and other Italian jurists to
elaborate the thesis (which we examine in some detail later) that
necessity is the primary source of law.

In each of these cases, the state of siege was proclaimed by a royal
decree that, while not requiring parliamentary ratification, was
nevertheless always approved by parliament, as were other emergency
decrees not related to the state of siege (in 1923 and 1924 several
thousand outstanding law-decrees issued in the preceding years were thus
converted into law). In 1926 the Fascist regime had a law issued that
expressly regulated the matter of the law-decrees. Article 3 of this law
established that, upon deliberation of the council of ministers, "norms
having force of law" could be issued by royal decree "(1) when the
government is delegated to do so by a law within the limits of the
delegation, and (2) in extraordinary situations, in which it is required
for reasons of urgent and absolute necessity. The judgment concerning
necessity and urgency is not subject to any oversight other than
parliament's political oversight." The decrees provided for in the
second clause had to be presented to parliament for conversion into law;
but parliament's total loss of autonomy during the Fascist regime
rendered this condition superfluous.

Although the Fascist governments' abuse of emergency decrees was so
great that in 1939 the regime itself felt it necessary to limit their
reach, Article 77 of the Republican Constitution established with
singular continuity that "in extraordinary situations of necessity and
emergency" the government could adopt "provisional measures having force
of law," which had to be presented the same day to parliament and which
went out of effect if not converted into law within sixty days of their
issuance.

It is well known that since then the practice of executive
[governamentale] legislation by law-decrees has become the rule in
Italy. Not only have emergency decrees been issued in moments of
political crisis, thus circumventing the constitutional principle that
the rights of the citizens can be limited only by law (see, for example,
the decrees issued for the repression of terrorism: the law-decree of
March 28, 1978, n. 59, converted into the law of May 21 1978, n. 191
[the so-called Moro Law], and the law-decree of December 15, 1979, n.
625, converted into the law of February 6, 1980, n. 15), but law-decrees
now constitute the normal form of legislation to such a degree that they
have been described as "bills strengthened by guaranteed emergency."
This means that the democratic principle of the separation of powers has
today collapsed and that the executive power has in fact, at least
partially, absorbed the legislative power. Parliament is no longer the
sovereign legislative body that holds the exclusive power to bind the
citizens by means of the law: it is limited to ratifying the decrees
issued by the executive power. In a technical sense, the Italian
Republic is no longer parliamentary, but executive [governamentale]. And
it is significant that though this transformation of the constitutional
order (which is today underway to varying degrees in all the Western
democracies) is perfectly well known to jurists and politicians, it has
remained entirely unnoticed by the citizens. At the very moment when it
would like to give lessons in democracy to different traditions and
cultures, the political culture of the West does not realize that it has
entirely lost its canon.



The only legal apparatus in England that is comparable to the French
état de siège goes by the term martial law; but this concept is so vague
that it has been rightly described as an "unlucky name for the
justification by the common law of acts done by necessity for the
defence of the Commonwealth when there is war within the realm." This,
however, does not mean that something like a state of exception could
not exist. In the Mutiny Acts, the Crown's power to declare martial law
was generally confined to times of war; nevertheless, it necessarily
entailed sometimes serious consequences for the civilians who found
themselves factually involved in the armed repression. Thus Schmitt
sought to distinguish martial law from the military tribunals and
summary proceedings that at first applied only to soldiers, in order to
conceive of it as a purely factual proceeding and draw it closer to the
state of exception: "Despite the name it bears, martial law is neither a
right nor a law in this sense, but rather a proceeding guided
essentially by the necessity of achieving a certain end."

World War One played a decisive role in the generalization of
exceptional executive [governamentali] apparatuses in England as well.
Indeed, immediately after war was declared, the government asked
parliament to approve a series of emergency measures that had been
prepared by the relevant ministers, and they were passed virtually
without discussion. The most important of these acts was the Defence of
the Realm Act of August 4, 1914, known as DORA, which not only granted
the government quite vast powers to regulate the wartime economy, but
also provided for serious limitations on the fundamental rights of the
citizens (in particular, granting military tribunals jurisdiction over
civilians). The activity of parliament saw a significant eclipse for the
entire duration of the war, just as in France. And in England too this
process went beyond the emergency of the war, as is shown by the
approval—on October 29, 1920, in a time of strikes and social
tensions—of the Emergency Powers Act. Indeed, Article 1 of the act
stated that

   
- if at any time it appears to His Majesty that any action has been
taken or is immediately threatened by any persons or body of persons of
such a nature and on so extensive a scale as to be calculated, by
interfering with the supply and distribution of food, water, fuel, or
light, or with the means of locomotion, to deprive the community, or any
substantial portion of the community, of the essentials of life, His
Majesty may, by proclamation (hereinafter referred to as a proclamation
of emergency), declare that a state of emergency exists.

Article 2 of the law gave His Majesty in Council the power to issue
regulations and to grant the executive the "powers and duties…necessary
for the preservation of the peace," and it introduced special courts
("courts of summary jurisdiction") for offenders. Even though the
penalties imposed by these courts could not exceed three months in jail
("with or without hard labor"), the principle of the state of exception
had been firmly introduced into English law.



The place—both logical and pragmatic—of a theory of the state of
exception in the American constitution is in the dialectic between the
powers of the president and those of Congress. This dialectic has taken
shape historically (and in an exemplary way already beginning with the
Civil War) as a conflict over supreme authority in an emergency
situation; or, in Schmittian terms (and this is surely significant in a
country considered to be the cradle of democracy), as a conflict over
sovereign decision.

The textual basis of the conflict lies first of all in Article 1 of the
constitution, which establishes that "the Privilege of the Writ of
Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in Cases of Rebellion
or Invasion the public Safety may require it" but does not specify which
authority has the jurisdiction to decide on the suspension (even though
prevailing opinion and the context of the passage itself lead one to
assume that the clause is directed at Congress and not the president).
The second point of conflict lies in the relation between another
passage of Article 1 (which declares that the power to declare war and
to raise and support the army and navy rests with Congress) and Article
2, which states that "the President shall be Commander in Chief of the
Army and Navy of the United States."

Both of these problems reach their critical threshold with the Civil War
(1861–1865). Acting counter to the text of Article 1, on April 15, 1861,
Lincoln decreed that an army of seventy-five thousand men was to be
raised and convened a special session of Congress for July 4. In the ten
weeks that passed between April 15 and July 4, Lincoln in fact acted as
an absolute dictator (for this reason, in his book Dictatorship, Schmitt
can refer to it as a perfect example of commissarial dictatorship. On
April 27, with a technically even more significant decision, he
authorized the General in Chief of the Army to suspend the writ of
habeas corpus whenever he deemed it necessary along the military line
between Washington and Philadelphia, where there had been disturbances.
Furthermore, the president's autonomy in deciding on extraordinary
measures continued even after Congress was convened (thus, on February
14, 1862, Lincoln imposed censorship of the mail and authorized the
arrest and detention in military prisons of persons suspected of
"disloyal and treasonable practices").

In the speech he delivered to Congress when it was finally convened on
July 4, the president openly justified his actions as the holder of a
supreme power to violate the constitution in a situation of necessity.
"Whether strictly legal or not," he declared, the measures he had
adopted had been taken "under what appeared to be a popular demand and a
public necessity" in the certainty that Congress would ratify them. They
were based on the conviction that even fundamental law could be violated
if the very existence of the union and the juridical order were at stake
("Are all the laws but one to go unexecuted, and the Government itself
go to pieces lest that one be violated?"

It is obvious that in a wartime situation the conflict between the
president and Congress is essentially theoretical. The fact is that
although Congress was perfectly aware that the constitutional
jurisdictions had been transgressed, it could do nothing but ratify the
actions of the president, as it did on August 6, 1861. Strengthened by
this approval, on September 22, 1862, the president proclaimed the
emancipation of the slaves on his authority alone and, two days later,
generalized the state of exception throughout the entire territory of
the United States, authorizing the arrest and trial before courts
martial of "all Rebels and Insurgents, their aiders and abettors within
the United States, and all persons discouraging volunteer enlistments,
resisting militia drafts, or guilty of any disloyal practice, affording
aid and comfort to Rebels against the authority of the United States."
By this point, the president of the United States was the holder of the
sovereign decision on the state of exception.

According to American historians, during World War One President Woodrow
Wilson personally assumed even broader powers than those Abraham Lincoln
had claimed. It is, however, necessary to specify that instead of
ignoring Congress, as Lincoln had done, Wilson preferred each time to
have the powers in question delegated to him by Congress. In this
regard, his practice of government is closer to the one that would
prevail in Europe in the same years, or to the current one, which
instead of declaring the state of exception prefers to have exceptional
laws issued. In any case, from 1917 to 1918, Congress approved a series
of acts (from the Espionage Act of June 1917 to the Overman Act of May
1918) that granted the president complete control over the
administration of the country and not only prohibited disloyal
activities (such as collaboration with the enemy and the diffusion of
false reports), but even made it a crime to "willfully utter, print,
write, or publish any disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive language
about the form of government of the United States."

Because the sovereign power of the president is essentially grounded in
the emergency linked to a state of war, over the course of the twentieth
century the metaphor of war becomes an integral part of the presidential
political vocabulary whenever decisions considered to be of vital
importance are being imposed. Thus, in 1933, Franklin D. Roosevelt was
able to assume extraordinary powers to cope with the Great Depression by
presenting his actions as those of a commander during a military campaign:

- I assume unhesitatingly the leadership of this great army of our
people dedicated to a disciplined attack upon our common problems.…I am
prepared under my constitutional duty to recommend the measures that a
stricken Nation in the midst of a stricken world may require.…But in the
event that the Congress shall fail to take [the necessary measures] and
in the event that the national emergency is still critical, I shall not
evade the clear course of duty that will then confront me. I shall ask
the Congress for the one remaining instrument to meet the crisis—broad
Executive power to wage war against the emergency, as great as the power
that would be given to me if we were in fact invaded by a foreign foe.

It is well not to forget that, from the constitutional standpoint, the
New Deal was realized by delegating to the president (through a series
of statutes culminating in the National Recovery Act of June 16, 1933)
an unlimited power to regulate and control every aspect of the economic
life of the country—a fact that is in perfect conformity with the
already mentioned parallelism between military and economic emergencies
that characterizes the politics of the twentieth century.

The outbreak of World War Two extended these powers with the
proclamation of a "limited" national emergency on September 8, 1939,
which became unlimited on May 27, 1941. On September 7, 1942, while
requesting that Congress repeal a law concerning economic matters, the
president renewed his claim to sovereign powers during the emergency:
"In the event that the Congress should fail to act, and act adequately,
I shall accept the responsibility, and I will act.…The American people
can…be sure that I shall not hesitate to use every power vested in me to
accomplish the defeat of our enemies in any part of the world where our
own safety demands such defeat." The most spectacular violation of civil
rights (all the more serious because of its solely racial motivation)
occurred on February 19, 1942, with the internment of seventy thousand
American citizens of Japanese descent who resided on the West Coast
(along with forty thousand Japanese citizens who lived and worked there).

President Bush's decision to refer to himself constantly as the
"Commander in Chief of the Army" after September 11, 2001, must be
considered in the context of this presidential claim to sovereign powers
in emergency situations. If, as we have seen, the assumption of this
title entails a direct reference to the state of exception, then Bush is
attempting to produce a situation in which the emergency becomes the
rule, and the very distinction between peace and war (and between
foreign and civil war) becomes impossible."

(http://www.press.uchicago.edu/Misc/Chicago/009254.html)



=More Information=

#[[Sovereignty]]

* Case study in the context of the Blockchain's [[Polycentric Governance]]: see The [[DAO Hack]]

[[Category:Governance]]
[[Category:P2P_State_Approaches]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Politics]]