==Bio==

A year of grassroots work after highschool in a rural community in El Salvador, Central America inspired me to take up interdisciplinary [http://lateinamerika.phil-fak.uni-koeln.de/rwl.html Latin American Studies at Cologne University], Germany, covering political sciences, economics, Latin American history and culture. Concluding studies with a thesis on the internet's potential for political participation, I worked at the university's [http://lateinamerika.phil-fak.uni-koeln.de/ueber2.html Latin America Centre] for a while. Subsequently I joined the lobby and advocacy unit of an NGO working on issues such as public health, trade justice, biodiversity and sustainable development. After merging with another NGO I became part of the economy and ecology unit, soon taking over a new task, focusing on [http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zukunftsf%C3%A4higes_Deutschland sustainable Germany], sustainable development and the necessary [http://smart-csos.org/5leveragepoints great transition]. That's how I got in touch with the [http://smart-csos.org/ Smart CSOs Lab]. Since my job moved far away from my home and family I opted for a new challenge and advocated for climate justice and [http://climaterights.org/ climate change as a human rights issue] for the past 2.5 years. For now I am back to Latin America, in charge of projects for a specific country.  

Probably without knowing, I first came across the [′kɔmənz] using and promoting free software among colleagues and friends. Well, actually - from a retrospective - we did lot's of [′kɔməning] back in that rural community in El Salvador! But my 'conscious' interest in and commitment for the [′kɔmənz] skyrocketed after reencountering with [https://commons.blog/ Silke Helfrich] who I had met years before in El Salvador, and after supporting and participating in the first [http://p2pfoundation.net/Berlin_Commons_Conference Berlin Commons Conference]. I am convinced that the [′kɔmənz] paradigm can help to overcome the current concept of (sustainable) development which is trapped in capitalist market based patterns and solutions. 

I like to describe the [′kɔmənz] as a [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaleidoscope kaleidoscope] which - by breaking (with prevailing) patterns - visualizes potentials for societal change and forms of oganization beyond market and state; and which mirrors the many-colourfulness of (co)existence.

==Some thoughts and writings==
to be added..

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Germany]]
[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]