
= book vs monetary protocol


=The Book=

'''* Book: Stellar: A world beyond limits and how to get there. James Arbib and Tony Seba.'''

URL = https://stellarworld.com/about-the-book


'''1. From the authors/publishers:'''

“Stellar challenges conventional thinking and offers a vision of hope and optimism – a necessary antidote to the fear and despair that define our times.

Stellar uncovers the root causes of today’s biggest challenges, from war and economic instability to inequality and environmental collapse. It reveals why solutions to these issues are little more than band-aids, why our political and economic structures are failing, and how to unlock humanity’s full potential. 
Stellar reimagines what’s possible - a world that gives rather than takes from both people and planet. A Stellar World where today’s pressing issues simply dissolve, where humanity can thrive, free from fear, scarcity, and despair.”


'''2. From Mammouth.ai:'''

“This book is a futurist manifesto exploring how exponential technologies can solve global challenges and create an abundant, sustainable future. Unlike the blockchain-focused Stellar by Michael Arbib and Tony Seba, this work aligns with the "upwinger" vision of technology—an optimistic, solution-driven perspective on how innovation can overcome scarcity, environmental degradation, and inequality.

The book aligns with thinkers like Peter Diamandis (Abundance), Ray Kurzweil (Singularity), and R. Buckminster Fuller (Spaceship Earth), who believe technology can solve humanity’s greatest problems.

It contrasts with "doomer" or "collapsist" narratives, instead presenting a roadmap for a thriving civilization.”



=The Protocol=

'''= "Stellar is a decentralized protocol for sending and receiving money in any pair of currencies. This means users can, for example, send a transaction from their Yen balance and have it arrive in Euros, Yen, or even bitcoin".''' 
[https://www.stellar.org/blog/introducing-stellar/]

URL = https://www.stellar.org/


'''0. Tomi Kalmi:'''

"Stellar network is a blockchain-based payment system for creating tokens and exchanging
them between accounts. Its main selling points are fast transaction speed
(it takes 2–5 s on average to resolve a transaction) and cheap fees. The native token
of Stellar is XLM, or lumen.

The consensus protocol used in Stellar network is a modification of Federated
Byzantine Agreement called the [[Stellar Consensus Protocol]] (SCP). Tokens are
created by issuing credit, which makes it easy for anyone to create a token to, for
instance, represent a real world asset. The tokens become valid for anyone who
declares that they trust the issuing account. This feature makes Stellar especially
effective for financial institutions and other large organizations for issuing their own
tokens.

Unlike, for example, in Ethereum, smart contracts in Stellar are not Turing
complete. While this limits their general functionality, the reduced complexity
mitigates the risk of security breaches that have caused issues in Ethereum [17].
According to stellar.org, integrating Stellar to a service takes typically 120-200
developer hours. To ease the development process, stellar.org offers a free testnet."
(https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Comparison_of_Blockchain-Based_Technologies_for_Implementing_Community_Currencies)


'''1.'''

By Michael J. Casey and Paul Vigna:

"Mr. McCaleb’s new project is a network system called Stellar that promises a bridge between the virtual and traditional currency worlds . It will use a decentralized network of computers run by so-called “gateway” institutions – banks and other financial firms — to cheaply and efficiently manage and authenticate a public record of transactions. Those gateways provide the exchange services that allow outside customers to send money to others anywhere in the world.

...

Like bitcoin and Ripple, the Stellar network will operate with an open-source protocol, meaning anybody can work to improve the software. Also as with bitcoin and Ripple, it will have its own internal digital currency, called stellar.

But Stellar is consciously different in some key areas.

One key difference is that 95% of the currency is being given away for free at the outset, the bulk of it from an initial issuance of 100 billion coins created by the not-for-profit foundation that will run the project. New coins will be later added at no cost to the circulation at a rate of 1% per year.

The decision to give away nearly all the coins was colored by Mr. McCaleb’s experience with Ripple, whose benefits as a groundbreaking technology were sometimes overwhelmed by the suspicions of digital-currency investors, some of whom derided it as a “pre-mined” scam. Whereas new bitcoins are constantly being brought into existence by “miners” who receive them as rewards for confirm transactions across network, Ripple Labs created the entire issuance of 100 billion of its own coins, known as XRP, in one fell swoop, retaining a large portion for the company and its founders. That was done so that a separate foundation, called OpenCoin, could coordinate release of XRP over time to designated gateways. But it inevitably created suspicions among some cryptocurrency enthusiasts.

...

Of the 95 billion coins to be distributed, half of those will be available free to applicants who place orders via Facebook. The other half will be reserved for charities working in the fields of economic development and poverty alleviation and non-profits that are early adopters of digital money.

As with Ripple, a key selling point for Stellar will be that it allows people to make payments with traditional currencies while using the efficiency of a cryptocurrency network to lower costs and speed up processing.

“This is probably the best way to bring the best of both worlds together,” said Ms. Kim.

The Stellar Development Foundation’s board is comprised of Mr. McCaleb, Keith Rabois, the former COO at smartphone credit card swipe provider Square, and Patrick Collison, the CEO of Stripe, a maker of software for payment processing.. The development team is led by Mr. McCaleb and David Mazieres, a Stanford professor who heads up the school’s Secure Computer Systems group. Advisors include Dan Kaminsky, Joi Ito, Greg Stein, Jackson Palmer, and Naval Ravikant.

Ms. Kim said the hope is that developers in different nations will tailor products and services around Stellar that will best serve their local communities.

The biggest goal of Stellar, she said, is to spur adoption of cryptocurrencies, with the team focused on overcoming three specific hurdles: education, access, and volatility."

(http://stream.wsj.com/story/markets/SS-2-5/SS-2-594057/)


'''2. Joyce Kim:'''

"Stellar is a decentralized protocol for sending and receiving money in any pair of currencies. This means users can, for example, send a transaction from their Yen balance and have it arrive in Euros, Yen, or even bitcoin. We’re expecting to support the usual categories of transactions: payments to a merchant, remittances back home, or rent splits with a roommate.

You can hold a balance with a gateway, which is any network participant you trust to accept a deposit in exchange for credit on the network. Stellar also comes with a built-in digital currency, referred to as the stellar, which we’re giving away for free. The currency will have value (as determined by the market); however, its primary function is providing a conversion path between other currencies.

We hope that people will build applications on top of Stellar to help bridge the gap between digital and traditional currencies."

(https://www.stellar.org/blog/introducing-stellar/)


==Status==

Tomi Kalmi:

"Stellar was founded in 2014 by Jed McCaleb, who has been involved in high profile
projects in the blockchain ecosystem, such as Ripple and Mt. Gox. It is also
backed by multiple major investors and advisors, such as people behind Stripe, Y
Combinator, and WordPress. These people can bring influence to the project, which
should help make Stellar stable and ensure development into the future.

Stellar’s software is open sourced with Apache License, version 2.0. The main
organization behind the design and development of Stellar is Stellar Development
Foundation, which operates on a nonprofit manner."

(https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Comparison_of_Blockchain-Based_Technologies_for_Implementing_Community_Currencies)


==Funding==

By the Stripe company's Greg Brockman:

"Stellar's goal is to build a great transport layer for transmitting monetary value. Figuring out how to efficiently move money is something we support very strongly: Stripe spends a lot of effort integrating different banking and finance protocols in various countries (17 at last count). We've always considered it unlikely that these systems would be just as fragmented in twenty years. Bitcoin has already changed the world by drawing attention to the value of open, distributed protocols that enable the transmission and storage of money. Stellar aims to advance this success by providing a way to transact in one's currency of choice, whether that currency is fiat or digital.

We're very bullish on the cryptocurrency space in general, and expect that multiple systems will prosper. When the opportunity arose to help Stellar, we enthusiastically agreed. A couple of months ago, Stripe contributed $3M to help get the project going. In return, we received 2% of the stellars. However, the project is not run by Stripe. We just believe that a system with properties like Stellar's should exist in the world, and we heartily encourage anyone interested to participate in its development. We're going to auction a majority of our stellars to other interested companies, with any net profits being returned to the Stellar Foundation—please get in touch if your company might be interested."

(https://stripe.com/blog/stellar)


[[Category:P2P Futures]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Standards]]
[[Category:Money]]
[[Category:P2P_Infrastructure]]