


=Bio=

"Sten Linnander - a brief resumé of my life

Born in Sweden, I spent several of my childhood years in the 1950s and 1960s growing up and going to international schools in Kabul, Afghanistan and Kathmandu, Nepal. This early exposure to different cultures made a great impression on me, and ever since I have seen myself more as a citizen of the Earth than of any specific country. 
Having returned to Sweden, I finished school and studied physics, mathematics and geophysics at the Royal Institute of Technology and Stockholm University, graduating with a B.Sc. in Physics and Geophysics from Stockholm University in 1974. 

I spent two years working at the Swedish State Institute for Building Research as author of manuals for architectural computer programs, and co-authored a book about Swedish building research in Third World countries. In 1976 I left Sweden, and have not lived there since. 

I then spent 3 years at a radical community in Austria, which had developed a communitarian lifestyle of their own, with an emphasis on artistic expression, daily spontaneous theater, and art. An important experimental feature of the community was having a fully developed system of common property. I left because I disagreed with many of the structures that had been created there. 

I then spent 3 years in the United States, patenting and marketing new technologies and inventions in the areas of oil recycling, cleaning of oily waste water, and cleaning of air and gas. 

After that, in 1983, I joined an experimental social model in Germany. My main work there was as the head of a "free university", organizing visits by internationally acknowledged researchers and innovators from the social, scientific, and spiritual areas. 

In 1990 I and two friends of mine founded the German non-profit organization "Aktion Perestroika", which I headed for 3 years. We organized aid programs and the transfer of technological know-how, and carried out a number of projects in the areas of ecology, medicine, and city administration in the former Soviet Union. 

From 1994 to 2002 I spent most of my time in Arizona in the United States. There, I studied Native American shamanism and established and ran the non-profit research organization Future Link Foundation, Inc. 

Since then I have been living in Germany and have been working to prepare a project for the worldwide marketing and distribution of live images of the Earth. 

During the last 15 years I have also been working as a freelance translator for translation agencies in Switzerland and Germany, as well as for other companies, institutions and individuals. 
I am married and live in Frankfurt, Germany."


Relation to the [[Commons]] thematic:

"a) Having lived for 3 years in a community of about 150 people practicing common property, and a further 10 years in a community researching new social models, I have had first-hand experience of the issues and advantages and disadvantages of this approach.

b) In my view, a commons approach first of all requires a commons perspective and a commons consciousness. It specifically requires a global perspective. One way of supporting the emergence of this common perspective and common consciousness is to introduce and disseminate, worldwide, live images of the Earth, providing a live perspective of the one home that we all share."



=Projects=

I am currently working to prepare a project involving the dissemination of live images of the whole earth. This project is described on the website: 
www.future-link.org

I am the President of the [[Future Link Foundation]], Inc., an Arizona non-profit organization, which is planning to conduct research into the areas of energy, the Earth, communication, how we create reality, and transformational processes. The first project that is to be realized is the project relating to live images of the Earth as described on the website above. 

Participant at the [[Berlin Commons Conference]], November 2010

=More Information=

Contact via Email: Stenlinnander@aol.com


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Germany]]

[[Category:Spirituality