
'''= "The steps-to-war explanation is used to predict deductively whether certain transitions are at risk of war and how that war might come about."''' [https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057/9780230618381_7]

=More information=

'''* Article / Chapter: Whether and How Global Leadership Transitions Will Result in War: Some Long-Term Predictions from the ''Steps-to-War Explanation''. John A. Vasquez. Chapter 7 of: [[Systemic Transitions]]. Past, Present, and Future. Ed. by William R. Thompson. Palgrave Macmillan, 2009'''

URL = https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057/9780230618381_7

"This analysis is an exercise in predicting the future likelihood of war
breaking out during major transitions that might occur in the global
political system. A useful theory of the causes of war should be able to
predict the conditions under which war is highly likely or unlikely. It
should also be able to identify the factors that put pairs of states or systems
at risk for war. The two major transition theories that are the focus of
this book—power transition and long cycle theory—both specify certain
shifts in capability and in global leadership as conditions that increase the
likelihood of war. The theory employed in this analysis does not see either
of those conditions as the primary factors bringing about war. Instead, it
sees wars as arising mainly out of certain kinds of issues and how they are
handled. It examines how war grows out of the foreign policy behavior
and interactions of states. This steps-to-war approach seeks to identify the
steps states take that increase the probability of war and explain why they
take them. Over the last decade there has been considerable research on the steps
to war. This research in combination with the theory permit not only a
general set of predictions that can be used to identify the broad conditions
that increase the likelihood of war, but also permit predictions about the
likelihood that specific dyads will fight. For instance, there has been wide
speculation about the so-called coming transition between China and the
United States."

[[Category:Security]]
[[Category:Geopolitics]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Research]]