
=Discussion=

Peter Turchin:

"The gist of the argument is as follows. The Great Eurasian Steppe stretches some 7,000 km from Manchuria to Wallachia. After the Eurasian pastoralists developed horse riding around 1000 BCE (Turchin  et al. 2016), the steppe became home to nomadic horse archers who, despite their relatively small numbers (in comparison to  the  neighboring  agricultural  regions),  wielded  enormous  military  power.  This power was due to their plentiful supplies of horses, which were the most important military “technology” during the ancient and medieval eras; to their high military participation rate, as all adult men were warriors; and to their riding and archery skills resulting from their nomadic pastoralist way of life.  This preponderance of military power, coupled with a perennial need for agricultural products, created a high potential for conflict and warfare on  the frontiers  where the steppe abutted agrarian  regions.  In The  Perilous  Frontier Thomas  Barfield (1989)advanced  a “shadow empires” model, according to which steppe pastoralists formed confederations to obtain the needed products from adjacent agrarian empires by raiding, extortion,  or  forced  trade  whose  terms  favored  the  steppe  dwellers.

I  added  to Barfield’s model by arguing that just as the presence of sedentary empires exerted a pressure on the steppe to unify, the causality also flowed in the opposite direction: aggressive imperial confederations in the steppe exerted pressure on farming societies  to  scale  up  their  polities.  This  autocatalytic  process  of  mutual causality resulted in a recurrent formation of “mirror empires” on both sides of the steppe frontier (Turchin 2009). In addition to this direct effect, the steppe also exerted an indirect  influence  that  radiated  out  through  Afro-Eurasia.  Because  cavalry  (first horse  archers,  later  supplemented  by heavy  cavalry)  was  extremely  effective  at prosecuting war, agrarian polities eagerly adopted it and used it in wars with their neighbors. As a result, cavalry gradually spread throughout Afro-Eurasia, and later to the New World. The  Steppe  Effect  explains  why  the  incidence  of  mega-empires  (territorial polities controlling a territory of 1 million km2or more) is very high on the steppe frontiers—the contact and conflict zones between nomadic pastoralists and settled agriculturalists. Incidence of mega-empire rapidly declines with distance from the Eurasian Steppe. It also explains why the European states (at least after the fall of the Roman Empire) were an order of magnitude smaller than in China—Western Europe was insulated  from  the Steppe Effect  by  eastern Europe (which gave  rise to several mega-empires, the most recent of which is Russia). As Scheidel reviews, the  Steppe  Effect  is  supported  by  a  number  of  additional  lines  of  argument.  For example,  with  a  single  exception,  all  unifications  of  China  originated  in  the northwest  or  north—in  other  words,  from  the  steppe  frontier,  areas  that  due  to their  climate  had  much  less  productive  agriculture  than,  for  example,  the  lush Yangtze delta."

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4gg5q63b)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]