'''= [[Open Access]] advocate'''

=Bio=

"Stevan Harnad is a cognitive scientist based at the Université du Québec à Montréal. He is also one of the leading lights of the Open Access (OA) Movement, and a self-styled "archivangelist". 

Details: STEVAN HARNAD was born in Hungary, did his undergraduate work at McGill University and his graduate work at Princeton University. Currently Canada Research Chair in Cognitive Science at Universite du Quebec a Montreal and Professor in Electronics and Computer Science at University of Southampton, UK, his research is on categorisation, communication and cognition. Founder and Editor of Behavioral and Brain Sciences (a paper journal published by Cambridge University Press), he is Past President of the Society for Philosophy and Psychology, External Member of the Hungarian Academy of Science, and author and contributor to over 300 publications, including Origins and Evolution of Language and Speech (NY Acad Sci 1976), Lateralization in the Nervous System (Acad Pr 1977), Peer Commentary on Peer Review: A Case Study in Scientific Quality Control (CUP 1982), Categorical Perception: The Groundwork of Cognition (CUP 1987), The Selection of Behavior: The Operant Behaviorism of BF Skinner: Comments
and Consequences (CUP 1988), Scholarly Journals at the Crossroads: A Subversive Proposal for Electronic Publishing (1995), Essays on the Foundations and Fringes of Cognition (in prep) and Cognition Distributed: How Cognitive Technology Extends Our Minds (Benjamins 2008)


=More Information=

#Interview: [[Stevan Harnad on Open Access]]
#On the Deep Disanalogy Between Text and Software and Between Text and Data Insofar as Free/Open Access is Concerned, at http://listserver.sigmaxi.org/sc/wa.exe?A2=ind03&L=american-scientist-open-access-forum&D=1&O=D&F=l&S=&P=55522
#Apercus of WOS Meeting: Making Ends Meet in the Creative Commons, at http://users.ecs.soton.ac.uk/harnad/Hypermail/Amsci/3758.html
#Harnad, S. (1998/2000/2004) The invisible hand of peer review. Nature [online] (5 Nov. 1998), Exploit Interactive 5 (2000): and in Shatz, B. (2004) (ed.) Peer Review: A Critical Inquiry. Rowland & Littlefield. Pp. 235-242. http://cogprints.org/1646/


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:IP]]