
Podcast via https://www.thegreatsimplification.com/episode/30-steve-keen

=Excerpt=

Provided by Dave McLeod:

From the recent conversation between Nate Hagens and Steve Keen:

'''Steve Keen (00:31:06):'''

"If you go back to James Watson's steam engine, then the energy was coal. It was about nine tons a day
was consumed by the average machine, about 30% efficiency. You've fast forward to today, it's 10 tons
of kerosene per second, passing through a Falcon nine and the efficiency's a bit higher, maybe about
0.4, 0.45, but fundamentally that technology term can be reseen as the useful energy derived from a
machine. That's where our wealth has come from.


'''Nate Hagens (00:31:40):'''

I understand that. I agree with that. I wonder if everyone in the world understood what you and I do,
that technology is a vector for more energy use, and we do improve and innovate, but it's all predicated
on a growing amount of energy and a cheap amount of energy. If we have processes like aluminum
smelting or air travel, that require lots of units of adding fossil energy to replace things that humans
used to do, those processes break down and become unprofitable if energy prices double or triple. Look
at what's happening in Germany right now with lots of firms going out of business, because they can't
afford this level of energy cost, because their whole system was predicated on low energy prices continuing. But what if everyone in the world understood what you just said, that it's actually energy
that is close to, I could argue, as low as 0.6, as high as 0.1 in the economic formulas. What if everyone
understood that? What would happen?


'''Steve Keen (00:32:50):'''

I think a lot would happen because further ago we had that realization the more we'd realize that there
are limits to how much energy we can consume, because when you consume energy, you generate waste.
The second law of thermodynamics, fundamentally. That amount of energy consumption means more
than that amount of waste being dumped in the biosphere. One of the many manifestations that is
carbon dioxide, of course, but all the other wastes from everything we can produce and consume turns
up in the biosphere. The question is, how much capacity does the biosphere have to cope with that? We would be much more reasonable conversations about just how large human civilization can get. The
answer would be, "Oh my God. We're massively overshot what's sustainable."

(https://www.thegreatsimplification.com/episode/30-steve-keen)

[[Category:Energy]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Podcasts]]
[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]