
'''* Research Report: STEWARD OWNERSHIP. Rethinking Ownership in the 21st Century. Purpose Network''' 

URL = http://purpose-economy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Purpose_Steward_Ownership_Rethinking_Ownership-in-the-21st-Century.pdf


=Contextual Citation=

Colin Mayer on the  the corporation of the future:

"There are three themes that are really emerging
in the current discussions about corporations. 

Those are 

1. purpose, ensuring purpose, 

2. ownership and the nature of ownership that‘s contributive to the delivery of that purpose and 

3. governance and the way in which the management of companies is aligned to the delivery of that purpose. 

Those are the three key elements that are emerging."

(http://purpose-economy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Purpose_Steward_Ownership_Rethinking_Ownership-in-the-21st-Century.pdf)

=Summary=

"This booklet is a research publication put together for
entrepreneurs, business leaders, investors and anyone
with an interest in building a better economy.
We start with an interview with Colin Meyer, a well respected
Oxford professor who sets the historical and
philosophical context for our exploration into alternate
ownership (Page 10). Form there, we have a brief
call for ownership experimentation by Albert Wegner,
a well known Venture Capitalist, advocate of Basic Income
and economic thinker (Page 22).

Following that, you will find resource specifically
addressing the topic of “steward-ownership” - an ownership
form with a long history as a solution for companies
to enshrine their purpose at their core. In this
section, you will find case studies of companies that
have lasted generations, weathered economic collapses
and conflicts, created significant profits and continually
innovated on their core businesses (Page 26).

Accompanying them you will find an interview with
Thomas Bruch, the CEO in 5th generation of the German
family owned company GLOBUS with 43.000 employees
(Page 34). His personal experiences are powerful
and pragmatic windows into the ideas presented
here.

This booklet is produced by the Purpose Network,
which is dedicated to helping companies stay independent
and missions driven for the long term."


=Typology=

The booklet discusses five forms in more detail:

* Bosch 42: The Trust-Foundation Model

* Waschbär 46: The Golden Share Model

* John Lewis 50: Trust-Partnership Model

* Metis 56:  Perpetual Purpose Trust and Employee Ownership

* Drogeriemarkt 60: Single-Foundation Model


==Four Alternative Forms of Ownership to the Shareholder Corporation==

Albert Wenger:

'''* Cooperatives.''' 

These have played an important role in
the creation of utilities of various kinds from grocery
distribution to telephone networks. Generally the
members contribute capital to build some piece of
shared infrastructure.


'''* Mutuals.''' 

Insurance is inherently a network effects
business and many insurance companies started out
as mutuals. These are similar to co-operatives and may
have membership fees but tend not to require an initial
contribution of capital.


'''* Steward-Ownership.''' 

Companies can own themselves in whole or in part via a trust, club or foundation. This
is an ownership structure that has been quite common
historically in Europe. The role of the owning foundation
tends to be to uphold the longterm purpose.


'''* Decentralized.''' 

With the invention of Blockchain Technology
we may be able to unlock entirely new ownership
structures, where there is no need for a central
corporation at all and the network is directly owned
by its participants."

(http://purpose-economy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Purpose_Steward_Ownership_Rethinking_Ownership-in-the-21st-Century.pdf)

=Interview=

With Colin Mayer:

'''* What are corporations for? Why do they exist?'''

Colin Mayer: Corporations exist to perform functions
that benefit the customers or communities of the corporations.
And that reflects the origins of corporations.
The first named corporation was established in
Rome to undertake public functions during the first
few centuries AD. The roman concept of corporation
was designed to undertake public work and it was then
adopted subsequently by the Roman Catholic Church.
And in each case they had a specific designed function.
The public works of corporations included the
building of public buildings, roads, the provision of
public services. Also one of the earliest known forms
of cooperation is the university.


'''* Public goods as we would call it today.'''

CM: Yes, exactly. And in the case of the catholic church
it was literally to run and provide the administration.
In the case of the universities it was to provide education.
And in the middle-ages it was part of the formation
of the guilds overtaking trading functions, providing
training for people working in those guilds.


'''* So, by stating this, you take an opposing perspective to well-known statements such as “The purpose of a company is to maximize its own profits“. You wouldn‘t agree to this, would you?'''

CM: No, not at all. The purpose of a company is to perform
functions that will benefit to communities, societies,
customers and in the process of doing that the
owners of a company generate profits but profits are
not as such the objective of a corporation.


'''* What are profits for then?'''

CM: Profits are there to provide the incentives for those
who put up the capital for the business to do so, it is
the reward for doing so. But just as those who work for
the company should be rewarded for doing so. That
does not make the maximization of profits the objective
of the company. The objective of the company is to
deliver things that will benefit to others and just in the
process to make profits."


'''* If we shift towards purpose-driven companies, do we stick to the current ownership structure with the shareholders or what would you say?'''

CM: What it means for companies is, that they are shifting their ownership. There are two changes taking
place, one of which is that those that are running institutions
like pension funds and life-insurance companies
are increasingly realizing that the approach they
have taken in the past in the century of portfolio management,
holding diversified portfolios, is not beneficial
for them and that actually success comes from being
engaged long-term shareholders. Not hedge-fund
activism, but activism in the form of being supportive
of management and insuring that managing will deliver
on its purpose. That is one change that is taking
place in terms of the nature of the institutional investment.
The other change that is taking place is, companies
are increasingly realizing, that the influence of
the stock market on their activities is being incredibly
detrimental. And so, one of the features that is taking
place during the past few years is a collapse of stock
markets in the west. So, for example, over the last
twenty years, the number of companies listed in the
London Stock Exchange has halved from 2000 to 1000
and the same is taking place in the US. Companies
are voting with their feed, private equity is rising and
companies are going private. But private equity is not
the solution because companies need many cases to
raise capital and so what will emerge is a very different
nature of ownership. Companies will be listed still on
stock markets but they will have long-term committed
shareholders.


'''* Does this mean, the change consists only in the fact that shareholders, e.g. pension funds, invest with a more long-term perspective? Who will hold the control rights?'''

CM: The ultimate control rights reside in those who
have an interest in the delivery of the long-term purpose
of the corporation. That may not necessarily be
pension funds and insurance companies. The interesting
feature of companies like Bertelsmann and Bosch
is that they are not controlled by pension funds but
by foundations and that, I think, is a very interesting
alternative model that has some advantages over the
pension fund – life insurance approach.


'''* This morning, you also described the structure of the corporations within colleges like Cambridge and Oxford. The trustee you called the responsible cooperating partners. Don‘t you think, this could be a model for companies, too?'''

CM: So, that‘s basically like the foundations. If you like, the foundations are not quite ownless companies, but are almost ownless companies. Because the foundations themselves, are not answerable to any outside investor. So, the Oxford College model is in many respects a bit like an industrial foundation.



==History==

From the interview with Colin Mayer:

'''* Interestingly enough today not many people have the impression that this is the purpose of corporations that exist. How was this back in the old days in Rome? Did this work there already? Did the companies really work for the public benefit? Why so? What was different?'''

CM: What is different about companies of Rome and
such established in middle ages was that they were
established under license. So they had a fundamental
purpose to fulfil those public functions. In the case of
the medieval guilds it was to perform the roles in terms
of the delivery of particular services. In the case of
the medieval companies they got the licence from the
king, the monarchy and then subsequently from parliament.
So, for example corporations in the 18th and
19th century, 18th century in particular, which built
railways and canals did so under licences from parliament.
So the corporation up until the 19th century
was essentially licenced by government or monarchies
to perform its functions with a clearly defined public
purpose behind them. What changed that was really
the establishment of the colonies in the United States.
The colonies were established as corporations. So, for
example Massachusetts, Pennsylvania etc. were established
as corporations. And then in turn they committed
others to establish corporation within those states.
And so emerged the freedom to incorporate and became
a feature of corporation during the 19th century.
And thereafter the distinct public function of a corporation
was no longer the case.


'''* That‘s interesting. And during this period of licensing how was the ownership structure of these companies?'''

CM: So, there were public subscriptions much along
the lines of what we have today. So, to take another example,
the East Indian Company, which was one of the
largest companies of its time in the world, had public
outside subscribers and so the notion of there being
shareholders was well-established. But the difference
was, that those companies although they had shareholders,
had to perform this public function.
So, in history the fundamental purpose of the company
was to fulfil its licenced condition. And as part of
that, it would then generate the profits. So that‘s why
I‘m saying: the underlying notion of corporations was
not to maximize its profits. 


==Management Rights, not Ownership Rights==

'''* Was the East Indian Company the first company that actually had shareholders in the sense, that people who did not work in the company owned it?'''

CM: Well, it was not the first. I mean, for example,
there was the Russian Company or the Hudson Bay
Company, which were established to undertake trading
activities. They all had that same notion of their
being a purpose and objective of the establishment of
a corporation and then had shareholders who invested
in them. Now, if you look at other ones, the uniSo,
in history, the fundamental purpose of the
company was to fulfil its licenced
condition. And as part of that,
it would then generate the
profits. So that‘s why I‘m saying:
the underlying notion of
corporations was not to maximize its profits.


'''* If we split the term ‘ownership‘ or ‘property‘ into a bundle of rights including the ability to govern, to receive the profits, to sell it, inherit it or even destroy it, then as I understand, the college fellows inclusively hold the right to govern.'''

CM: Yes, they have if you like ‘management rights‘ but
not ‘ownership rights‘. This particular was an important
element to the corporation because what the companies
like the Russian Company did was it took the notion of
the guild – they had this ‚ministeric‘ role, they were just
purely ministering the activities like merging or trading
– but then it fused into the notion of having capital and
being able to raise more capital. So the real invention behind
things like The East Indian Company is to take the
notion of a guild as administration and to fuse into that
the notion of being able to raise capital. And that‘s what
really gives rise to the distinctive feature of corporation;
it is that combination of capital and administration."


==The Future==

'''* If you could design a perfect legal form for the future companies, what would it be like?'''

CM: I would design it in a way to encourage, as much
diversity in corporate forms as possible. So, legislation
should be enabling a company to choose that
form which is best suited to their situation. Not being
prescriptive in laying down any particular right
form. For example, in some cases employee-owned
companies are appropriate, in other cases industrial
foundations may be appropriate. An unfortunate feature
of what the European commission is trying to do
is based on trying to harmonize, not recognizing the
immense benefits that come in the European system
from diversity.


'''* You started off by depicting historical elements concerning features of corporations, especially the fact that every company needed a “licence“. Who could be the ‘purpose licence-provider‘ of the future?'''

CM: In many of the most successful companies, the essential
purpose comes from those who founded the organization.
And that‘s where the advantage over public
licensing comes, because you can then have a lot of
individual ideas to what the purpose should be. In my
book, I talk about this a bit like having lots of islands,
the world is populated by islands with different purposes
and people can choose which island they want
to live in, buy from, work for, invest in."


'''* Let‘s go 50 years into the future. We have a lot of purpose driven companies. How is this going to influence the functions of economy?'''

CM: Well, I can illustrate that simulation to perhaps
what is the most troublesome area of economy at the
moment and that is the banking system, where basically,
what we‘re trying to do is to insure that the objectives
of banks are aligned with the public purpose,
simply through regulating.

The problem with that is, that the objects of regulators
in upholding the public purposes is diametrically
opposed to the owners in terms of maximizing profit.

So, they do whatever they can to get round the regulations.
Now, what I‘ve just been describing in terms of
changing the purpose and in the case of banks ensuring
the licence condition is part of the purpose that
means that the fiduciary responsibilities of the directors is no longer simply to maximize profits, but to deliver on that purpose of the company. So, instead of
that being a conflict between the bank and the regulator,
the interest of the two becomes aligned. Through
this process, that whatever is perceived to be the public
interest, is actually delivered by corporations, not
circumvented by them.


'''* … we could deregulate and still uphold the public interest.'''

CM: Yes. The role of the regulator would become much
less intrusive than it is at present."

(http://purpose-economy.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Purpose_Steward_Ownership_Rethinking_Ownership-in-the-21st-Century.pdf)




[[Category:Open Company Formats]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]