
'''* Essay: Why is Open Access Development so Successful? Stigmergic organization and the economics of 
information. By Francis Heylighen.'''

URL = http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/OpenSourceStigmergy.pdf

In: : B. Lutterbeck, M. Bärwolff & R. A. Gehring (eds.), Open Source Jahrbuch
2007, Lehmanns Media, 2007


=Abstract=

"The explosive development of “free” or “open source” information
goods contravenes the conventional wisdom that markets and commercial
organizations are necessary to efficiently supply products. This paper proposes a
theoretical explanation for this phenomenon, using concepts from economics and
theories of self-organization. Once available on the Internet, information is
intrinsically not a scarce good, as it can be replicated virtually without cost.

Moreover, freely distributing information is profitable to its creator, since it
improves the quality of the information, and enhances the creator’s reputation.

This provides a sufficient incentive for people to contribute to open access
projects. Unlike traditional organizations, open access communities are open,
distributed and self-organizing. Coordination is achieved through stigmergy:
listings of “work-in-progress” direct potential contributors to the tasks where their
contribution is most likely to be fruitful. This obviates the need both for
centralized planning and for the “invisible hand” of the market."


=Excerpts=

==Self-organization through stigmergy==

Francis  Heylighen:

"To  understand  the distributed  organization  that characterizes open  access
development, we can draw inspiration from recent theories of self-organization (e.g.
Heylighen  & Gershenson, 2003) and  complex  adaptive systems (e.g. Muffatto  &
Faldani, 2003). A particularly  relevant idea, used  in  the modelling  of collective
intelligence (Heylighen, 1999) and the simulation of swarming behavior (Bonabeau,
Dorigo & Theraulaz, 1999), is the concept of stigmergy (Susi & Ziemke, 2001). A
process is stigmergic if the work (“ergon” in Greek) done by  one agent provides a
stimulus (“stigma”) that entices other agents to continue the job.

This concept was initially  proposed  to  explain  how a “bazaar” of dumb,
uncoordinated termites manage to build their complex, “cathedral-like” termite hills
(Grassé, 1959). The basic idea is that a termite initially drops a little bit of mud in a
random place, but that the heaps that are formed in this way stimulate other termites
to add to them (rather than start a heap of their own), thus making them grow higher
until they  touch  other similarly  constructed columns. The termites do not
communicate about who is to  do what how or when. Their only  communication is
indirect: the partially  executed work  of the ones provides information to the others
about where to  make their own  contribution. In this way, there is no  need  for a
centrally controlled plan, workflow, or division of labor.

While people are of course much  more intelligent than  social insects and  do
communicate, open  access development uses essentially  the same stigmergic
mechanism (cf. Elliott, 2006, and the simulation by Robles et al., 2005): any new or
revised  document or software component uploaded  to  the site of a community is
immediately scrutinized by the members of the community that are interested to use
it. When  one of them discovers a shortcoming, such  as a bug, error or lacking
functionality, that member will be inclined to either solve the problem him/herself, or
at least point it out to the rest of the community, where it may again entice someone
else to take up the problem.

Like stigmergic organization in insects (Bonabeau  et al., 1999), the process is self-reinforcing  or autocatalytic (Heylighen, 1999; Heylighen & Gershenson, 2003): the
more high  quality  material is already  available on  the community  site, the more
people will be drawn  to  check  it out, and  thus the more people are available to
improve it further. Thus, open access can profit from a positive feedback cycle that
boosts successful projects. This explains the explosive growth of systems such  as
Wikipedia or Linux. (A possible disadvantage of such “rich get richer” dynamics is
that equally valuable, competing projects, because of random fluctuations or sequence
effects, may fail to get the critical mass necessary to “take off”.)

While most large-scale open access projects (such as Linux) have one or a few central
figures (such  as Linus Torvalds) that determine the general direction  in  which  the
project is headed, this control is much  less strict than  in  traditional hierarchical
organizations. Most of the work  is typically  performed  in  a distributed, self-organizing way. The lack  of precise planning is more than  compensated for by the
fact that information  about the present state of the project is completely  and freely
available, allowing anyone to contribute to anything at any moment. This provides for
a much larger diversity of perspectives and experiences that are applied to finding and
tackling  problems, resulting  in what Raymond  (1999) calls Linus’ Law: “given
enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow”. Moreover, since contributors select the tasks
they  work  on  themselves, they  tend  to  be more interested, motivated  and 
knowledgeable about these tasks.

In this way, open access development fully profits from the evolutionary dynamic of
variation, recombination and  selection (van  Wendel de Joode, 2004; Muffatto  &
Faldani, 2003). Openness attracts a greater number and  diversity  of participants,
increasing  the likeliness of cross-fertilization  of their ideas into  new combinations.

This strongly  accelerates the variation  that is necessary  to  produce evolutionary
novelty. This large and  diverse community moreover enhances selection, since the
new ideas will be tested in many more different circumstances, thus systematically
eliminating  the errors and  weaknesses that might not have shown  in  a more
homogeneous environment. All in all, this leads to greater flexibility, innovation, and
reliability.

Stigmergy is more than blind variation and natural selection, though: the visible traces
of the work performed previously function as a mediator system (Heylighen, 2007),
storing and (indirectly) communicating information for the community. In that way,
the mediator coordinates further activity, directing  it towards the tasks where it is
most likely  to  be fruitful. This requires a shared  workspace accessible to  all
contributors (similar to what in  AI is called a “blackboard system”). This external
memory registers which tasks have already been  performed and what problems still
need to be tackled. The Web has provided a very powerful such workspace, since it
enables the storage and public sharing of any “work-in-progress” information product.

To  better understand  the methods used  by open access communities, we need  to
further distinguish direct from indirect stigmergy. In direct stigmergy, as exemplified
by the termite-hill building, it is the “work-in-progress” itself that directs subsequent
contributions. Indirect stigmergy may be exemplified by the way ants create trails of
pheromones that direct other ants to food sources. The trails are left as “side-effects”
of the actual work  being  performed: finding  and  bringing  food  to  the nest. Such 
specially  created traces may  be needed  because the task—finding  the proverbial
“needle (food) in the haystack  (surroundings)”—is too  complex  to  be performed 9
without detailed  clues. Thus, “indirect stigmergy” uses an  additional medium for
information  storage. Yet, the coordination  achieved  in  this way  still keeps the
hallmarks of distributed self-organization: the information is addressed to no one in 
particular, and may or may not be picked up by a particular individual at a particular
moment.

In open access development, indirect stigmergy can be recognized in forums where
bugs or feature requests are posted. These forums are themselves not part of the
information  product being  developed, but they  are regularly  consulted  by the
developers, thus attracting their attention to tasks that seem worth  performing. The
problem with such an additional medium is that it adds to the complexity of the (self-
)organization, especially  if there is a lot of potentially  relevant information  posted 
there so  that it becomes difficult to  establish  priorities. Here again  we can  learn  a
lesson from social insects. The pheromone trails left by ants undergo an efficient form
of reinforcement learning (Heylighen, 1999): trails that lead to rich food sources will
be used by many ants and thus amplified, trails that lead to poor or empty sources will
weaken  and  eventually  disappear. Since ants preferentially follow strong trails, this
mechanism ensures that the most important tasks or opportunities are tackled first.

Applied to open access development, this means that we need adaptive mechanisms to 
make the most important requests stand out. An example of such mechanism can be
found in Wikipedia. When a contributor marks a word as a hyperlink, but there is no
article discussing this concept yet, an empty page is created inviting other contributors
to fill in its content. This is direct stigmergy: whenever people look for that concept,
they are directed immediately to the work that still needs to be done. But when there
are many thousands of as yet incomplete entries, priorities must be established. Rather
than having a central committee decide which entries are most important, Wikipedia
implements a simple form of collective decision-making (cf. Heylighen, 1999): the
entries that have most hyperlinks pointing to them are listed first in an automatically 
generated list of “most wanted articles”.

Such a mechanism to display collective demand can be seen as the non-proprietary 
analog  of the market. The price mechanism efficiently  allocates resources to the
production  of those goods for which  demand  is highest, by  offering  the highest
monetary rewards for them. Similarly, a “most wanted” ordering of requests offers the
highest probability  of recognition  for the work  performed, or of “good  feelings”
engendered by an altruistic deed. Such stigmergic prioritization is arguably even more
efficient than  a market, since there is no need for the complex  and often irrational
processes of buying, selling, bargaining and speculation that determine the eventual
price of a commodity—leading  to the typically  chaotic movements of commodity
prices on the stock exchange. Moreover, although price could be interpreted as a — 
very  abstract — stigmergic signal, this variable is merely  one-dimensional. On  the
other hand, open access tasks could be ranked on a website according to independent
stigmergic criteria, such  as urgency, difficulty, expected  utility, required  expertise,
etc. In that way, potential contributors would be helped in finding the task that suits
them best.


==Conclusion==

Since the fall of the Soviet Union, the common  assumption  has been that markets,
private property  rights, and  commercial organizations are necessary  to  efficiently
produce and  distribute products. In  addition to the apparent failure of communism,
this view has been  supported  by  two  centuries of economic thought developing 
sophisticated  models that purport to  show that the market is the optimal way  to
allocate resources. In  the last few years, however, the collective development of
“open access” information products on the Web has emerged like a salient exception
to  this conventional wisdom. The present paper has proposed a theoretical
justification for this phenomenon.

First I have noted that the basic economic assumptions of rivalry and excludability are
not applicable to information shared  over the Internet. Once created, information is
intrinsically  not a scarce good, and therefore there is no  a priori reason  to  restrict
access to  it. On  the contrary, freely distributing information is likely to  profit its
creator, since it helps to improve the quality of the information, and to enhance the
creator’s expertise and reputation. Moreover, open access obviously profits everybody 
else, and  in  particular those who  otherwise would  be too  poor to  pay for the
information.

I then used the paradigm of self-organization through stigmergy to explain how open 
access development can be efficiently coordinated. Thanks to websites listing “workin-progress”, people willing to  contribute to  the collective development of an
information  product are efficiently  directed  to  the tasks where their contribution  is
most likely to  be fruitful. This obviates the need both for centralized  planning and
control, and for the “invisible hand” of the market matching supply to demand.

These innovations appear fundamental enough  to revolutionize our socio-economic
system (cf. Weber, 2004), offering  high  hopes for the future, e.g. in  stimulating 
innovation, education, democratization, and  economic development. While openaccess distribution is not applicable to material resources, their cost as a fraction of
the total economic cost of any good or service is becoming progressively smaller in a
society  that is ever more heavily  dependent on  information. Therefore, it could be
theoretically envisaged that most economic value would eventually be produced
under an open-access system. To make such a scenario less speculative, we will first
need  to investigate the complex issue of information  production that requires
considerable material investment, such as pharmaceutical research with its expensive
equipment, where patents and other ways of “closing off” information are rife. The
issue becomes less daunting, though, if we remember that this kind of research mostly 
builds on publicly funded (and thus normally open access) work.

To be able to fully compete with the established market-based system, moreover, the
still very young open access movement will need to further learn from its experiences,
addressing its remaining weaknesses and building further on its strengths. This will in
particular require developing better standards and rules, and more powerful software
solutions for harnessing stigmergy and allocating recognition and feedback—the main 
drivers behind the success of open access according to the present analysis.

For example, in the Wikipedia system—which otherwise keeps a very detailed track
of all changes made to all documents by all users—it is impossible at present to get an 
overview of how much  a particular user has contributed  to the system. Given
Wikipedia’s versioning system, it should be possible to measure how much of the text11
entered by a given user survives in the present state of the encyclopedia. This would 
provide a useful measure of both  the quantity  and  the quality  of that author’s
contributions, thus establishing  a benchmark  by which  to  measure expertise and
activity  level. Similarly, more advanced  algorithms (e.g. inspired  by  Google’s
PageRank or Hebbian learning, Heylighen, 1999) could be implemented to organize
and prioritize tasks. Such intelligent methods for coordinating distributed information
production  could  turn  the World-Wide Web  from merely  a collective memory or
shared  workspace into  a true “Global Brain” for humanity, that would  be able to 
efficiently solve any problem, however complex (Heylighen, 1999, 2004)."


=References=
Berners-Lee T. (1999). Weaving the Web, San Francisco: HarperCollins.

Bonabeau  E., Dorigo  M. & Theraulaz G. (1999) Swarm intelligence, Oxford
University Press.

Buss, D.M (1995) Evolutionary Psychology, Psychological Inquiry, 6, p. 1-30,

De Long J.B., Froomkin A. M., (1998). The next economy? in: Hurley D., Kahin B.,
Varian  H. (eds.), Internet Publishing  and  Beyond: The Economics of Digital
Information and Intellectual Property, Cambridge: MIT Press

Elliott, M. (2006) Stigmergic Collaboration: The Evolution  of Group  Work, M/C
Journal, 9(2). <http://journal.media-culture.org.au/0605/03-elliott.php>.

Ghosh, R. A. (1998) Cooking pot markets: an economic model for the trade in free
goods and  services on  the Internet, First Monday  Vol.3  No.3.
http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue3_3/

Grassé P.-P. (1959) La reconstruction du nid et les coordinations inter-individuelles
chez bellicositermes natalensis et cubitermes sp. la theorie de la stigmergie, Insectes
Sociaux 6, pp. 41-81.

Hajjem C., S. Harnad, Y. Gingras (2005) Ten-Year Cross-Disciplinary Comparison of
the Growth  of Open  Access and  How it Increases Research Citation Impact, IEEE
Data Engineering Bulletin 28(4): 39-47.

Hayek, F.A. (1945) The Use of Knowledge in Society, The American  Economic
Review 35, p. 519-530.

Heylighen  F. & C. Gershenson  (2003) The Meaning  of Self-organization  in
Computing, IEEE Intelligent Systems 18:4, p. 72-75.

Heylighen F. (1994) World-Wide Web: a distributed hypermedia paradigm for global
networking, in: Proceedings of SHARE Europe, Spring 1994, The Changing Role of
IT in Business (SHARE Europe, Geneva), p. 355-368.

Heylighen  F. (1999) Collective Intelligence and  its Implementation  on  the Web,
Computational and Mathematical Theory of Organizations 5(3), p. 253-280.

Heylighen F. (2004) Das Globale Gehirn als neue Utopia (The Global Brain as a new
Utopia), in: R. Maresch & F. Rötzer (eds.) Renaissance der Utopie, Suhrkamp,
Frankfurt.12

Heylighen F. (2007) Mediator Evolution, in: D. Aerts, B. D'Hooghe & N. Note (eds.):
Worldviews, Science and Us. (Singapore: World Scientific)

Howcroft D, (2001) After the goldrush: deconstructing  the myths of the dot.com
market, Journal of Information Technology 16, No. 4, 195 – 204.

Lerner, J. & Tirole, J, (2002) Some Simple Economics of Open Source . Journal of
Industrial Economics, Vol. 50, No. 2, 197-234.

Lih A. (2004) Wikipedia as Participatory Journalism, 5th International Symposium on 
Online Journalism.
http://journalism.utexas.edu:16080/onlinejournalism/2004/papers/wikipedia.pdf

Martens B. (2004) The Cognitive Mechanics of Economic Development and
Institutional Change, Routledge.

Maslow A.H. (1970). Motivation  and  Personality  (2nd  ed.), Harper & Row, New
York.

Moody  G. (2002) Rebel Code: Linux  and the Open  Source Revolution, Perseus
Publishing.

Muffatto  M. & Faldani M. (2003) Open  Source as a Complex  Adaptive System,
Emergence, 5(3), 83–100.

Raymond E. S. (1999). The Cathedral & the Bazaar, O'Reilly.

Reber A.S. (1993) Implicit learning and tacit knowledge, Oxford University Press

Robles, G., Merelo, J.J. & Gonzalez-Barahona, J.M. (2005) Self-Organized
Development in Libre Software: a Model based on the Stigmergy Concept, Proc. 6th
International Workshop on Software Process Simulation and Modeling.

Simon, H. A. (1971), Designing Organizations for an Information-Rich World, in: M.
Greenberger, ed., Computers, Communication, and the Public Interest, Johns Hopkins
Press.

Susi, T. & Ziemke, T. (2001). Social Cognition, Artefacts, and Stigmergy. Cognitive
Systems Research, 2(4), 273-290.

van Wendel de Joode, R. (2004), Innovation in Open Source Communities Through
Processes of Variation and Selection, Knowledge, Technology & Policy 16, issue: 4,
p. 30

Weber, S. (2004) The success of open source, Harvard University Press.
Williamson O.E., Maste S.E. (1995) Transaction cost economics, Elsevier.



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]