
'''*Article: Stigmergic dimensions of online creative interaction. Ed. by Margery Doyle, Leslie Marsh et al. Cognitive Systems Research.'''

URL = http://www.inf.ucv.cl/~bcrawford/Cuesta_Olivares/Stigmergy/1-s2.0-S1389041712000411-main.pdf


=Abstract=

"This paper examines the stigmergic dimensions of online interactive creativity through the lens of Picbreeder. Picbreeder is a webbased system for collaborative interactive evolution of images. The Picbreeder applet starts by randomly generating several images,
which are then mated and mutated based on the user’s selections. The user can then publish the image to the Picbreeder website where
other users can download and continue the image’s evolution. Within this process, users collaboratively create images with signiﬁcant
complexity, all without explicit communication. In short, Picbreeder encourages a new form of stigmergic collaborative creation. The
most surprising result of the Picbreeder experiment during more than 3 years of operation has been the quality of the resulting images,
despite the limited ways of interacting with other users. This fact challenges some commonly held notions of creativity, both online and
oﬄine. While current cognitive research in creativity places signiﬁcant emphasis of the personal traits and cognitive structures that give
rise to creative thought, Picbreeder highlights the potential for the emergence of creativity through stigmergic interaction. Picbreeder
oﬀers a rich data set for analysis of collaborative interaction with over 155,000 inputs from hundreds of users combined to create over
7500 images. It is hoped that the insights oﬀered in this paper will inﬂuence both the understanding of collaborative creativity and the
development of new modes of online creative interaction."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]