
=Discussion=

From an interview of the [[Radical Anthropology Group]] journal with Lionel Sims:


"Contrary to Parker-Pearson, '''you call Stonehenge a ‘monument of counter-revolution’. First, tell us what revolution and counter-revolution you are talking about. Stonehenge was built by settled Neolithic farmers, wasn’t it?'''


LS: Like Engels I believe that we
humans are a revolutionary species.
Our hunter-gatherer ancestors
overthrew primate jealousy and
selfishness and established a mode of
production through the revolutionary
creation of matrilineal/matrilocal
clans. The solidarity of classificatory
brothers and sisters, what Morgan
and Engels called ‘the gens’, was the
organisational heart of the first
communist society. Chris Knight, a
professor of anthropology at the
University of East London, and
others, have made this claim
scientifically respectable on the basis
of modern scientific methods.

However, that theory, sex-strike theory,
has a number of assumptions for it to
work. The main one is a materialist
assumption – that there are plenty of
big game animals for launching a
predictably successful, monthly big
game hunt. Now, that assumption
cannot be true by at least ten thousand
years ago, if not much earlier. Many of
the big game animals died out by then,
and much of the grasslands of the
world disappeared under forests –
which have a much lower biomass
than grasslands. All I asked is – what
would we predict the hunters would
have done? All we do is test out the
available alternatives – they could have
been conservative, and carried on
hunting, or they innovated. To carry
on hunting in the old way meant
dispersing into smaller, more scattered,
more mobile groups and, perhaps,
coming back together again once or
twice a year. This is what happened
over most of the world in a period we
call in British archaeology the
Mesolithic. If they innovated there
were two main ways to do so – become
complex hunters who ‘farmed’
salmon/cod from the sea and rivers (for
example), or become ‘farmers’.

Up until 20 years ago, it was the
‘farming revolution’ theory that held
sway. Archaeologists assumed that the
hunter-gatherer precursors of farmers
were irrelevant since “nothing much
happened” (as archaeologist Colin
Renfrew put it) until the farming of the
Neolithic. We now know that the first
‘farmers’ who built Stonehenge (and
Avebury, and so on) weren’t settled
farmers at all, but cattle herders who
still hunted, occasionally planted and
were not living in settled villages but
were still ‘nomadic’, ie, they preserved
as much of their earlier hunter-gatherer
lifestyle as possible. This has been
established by the last two decades of
research in archaeology, and is found
to be true for much of the world.

Intensive, sedentary farming was
resisted as much as possible by all the
people of the world. It was only under
the most pressing circumstances that it
was adopted.

The key to this, I am sure, was
sexual/economic politics. In a hunting
society, a man only earns sexual rights,
marriage, in return for hunting services
to his wife and in-laws. This is called
bride-service. Once domestic cattle
have been adopted, they are not used
for food, but for purchasing wives.
Then a man can approach another
man who has a daughter, and instead
of promising a life-time of hunting he
now bargains to purchase a wife in
perpetuity for a once-for-all payment
of a number of cattle. This is called
bride-price. Now look at this
arrangement from the point of view of
the bartered woman. What if she
doesn’t like her new husband? What if
she complains to her brother(s) or her
mother(s) that he is not a nice man?

What will they say? Go back to him,
they will say. Do you think we are
going to return his cattle? How will we
get a wife/children if we return his
cattle? Now brother/sister solidarity
has broken down, patrilineal/patrilocal
clans become the organisational heart
of a society increasingly stratified by
degrees of cattle wealth and warring
cattle-raiders. One way to keep such
groups from falling apart from internal
competition is to build monuments.

I’m no stone-hugger. These monuments
were labour-intensive structures to test
the loyalty of groups with the need to
atone for the crime of women’s
oppression. That’s a counter-revolution.

...


in the last 40 years there
has been a revolution in the life
sciences and, I would claim, this
revolution has provided the method
and the data to confirm the truth of
Engels’ claim that we are a
revolutionary species, and that
we established the first human
culture as communist.

Second, this communist society started
breaking down as the big game
animals of the Palaeolithic started to
die out. By the Neolithic, when
monument building began, wealthy
cattle-owning men are establishing
their power, partly through monument
building, at the expense of the earlier
brother-sister solidarity of the
matrilineal/matrilocal clans. This event
was, as Engels claimed, the world-historic
defeat of women and the
establishment of the first class societies.

Third, as the Neolithic counterrevolution
was based on economics,
not biology, and as we were present
at our own making as communists,
then the next revolution is a return to
the first, but now on the basis of
modern technology that can assure
plenty for all."
(http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/new/Journal_files/journal_02.pdf)





[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]