
'''= an open source decentralized storage platform'''

URL = http://storj.io


=Description=

Cameron Gray:

"The future of cloud storage is decentralization. Imagine being able to rent out your extra hard drive space through an autonomous network and getting paid for it in a cryptocurrency. This is being made possible thanks to Satoshi Nakamoto and platforms such as Storj, Maidsafe, Ethereum and others.  Now that we have the ability to tie P2P currency to resources such as storage space, bandwidth usage, and CPU power, services like Dropbox and Google Drive will be getting a run for their money.

Unlike other 2.0 platforms, Storj has decided to take a “baby steps” approach for developing their software. They want to build their system out in small, modular pieces first so that they can be used as working prototypes. The first of these pieces is a drag-and-drop file hosting web app called Metadisk, which recently had its whitepaper and video tutorial released. It’s important to note that Metadisk is just one piece of Storj, and as development progresses, more of these web apps, such as DriveShare (used for renting out your own hard drive space), will be coming together to form a more cohesive whole.

Cost: Storj has come out with an infographic on the comparative costs of storing data between a decentralized system like Storj and a traditional centralized system like Dropbox. The results are staggering. Storj claims that buying and selling hard drive space in an autonomous network would reduce the cost of cloud computing by orders of magnitude, 10-100x cheaper."
(http://bitcoinmagazine.com/15490/storj-vs-dropbox-decentralized-storage-future/)

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]