
=Text=

Authors are 'anonymous'.

'''Original Title: Resistance to the Architectural Establishment.''' 

Strategic outline prepared by the Political Research Laboratory of the International Society of Biourbanism (Rome) at the request of an Italian political foundation, March 2011.

1. Premise: The problem is endemic but not limited to architecture. The same madness, the same propaganda, the same corruption and totalitarian methods are destroying our planet and society. Resistance to iconic architecture extends to combating the destruction of our environment and culture, our civic, moral, and economic life, in trying to guarantee a healthy future for the human race. 

2. Long-term Strategy: To effect a transition from inhuman to human architecture. Educate the public so that all building activity is eventually a process for generating living urban fabric. Fighting the existing system of education, prizes, critics, and magazines is NOT a primary goal, but only when necessary to defend our ideas. By openly sharing our knowledge of adaptive design techniques, we can help prepare future architects and planners. 

3. Immediate strategy: Convince clients to prefer what we design and build applying Biophilia, human-scale design, and Biourbanism. Spread the knowledge and qualities of biophilic buildings and urban spaces through our publications, lectures, projects, and conferences so that the public can recognize their advantages. A separate effort must coordinate all these educational activities for maximum effect. Expose the serious flaws of competing types of design that are not biophilic. 

4. Tactics: Convince civic, political, and religious organizations and the construction industry of the advantages of adopting our method. Challenge the legitimacy of iconic architects, and condemn their designs’ flaws (anxiety-inducing, dysfunctional, expensive to build and maintain, non-adaptive to changing uses). Use the alternative media and internet to combat the propaganda of the architectural establishment. Avoid frontal conflict with academia; instead help students by providing an alternative training system.

5. Implementation: Explain our design method and its scientific basis openly in the media. Continue scientific research that backs up our method. Utilize Information and Communication Technologies as a methodological framework to plan for present and future socio-urban needs, and also to promote adaptive design. Expose the cult aspects of the architectural establishment, now unknown to students. Implement peer-to-peer techniques for freely distributing design knowledge, thereby breaking the establishment’s ideological stranglehold (artificial scarcity of design as the product of “genius”). 

6. Strengths of the establishment: A vast power structure links academia, an intellectual elite, money interests, architectural critics, and subservient journals spreading images of cult buildings and unbuilt projects all over the world. An ideology of images is used to award projects to a handful of international architects tied to a few giant multinational firms (supplanting local construction industries). The establishment rewards politicians who are allied with it, so they won’t jeopardize their existing advantage. Many architects are trained like religious fanatics to blindly support the cult ideology and its leaders. 

7. Weakness of the establishment: Its products contradict human physiology, thus non-indoctrinated persons (which is the majority) intuitively know they are harmful. For a century, buildings and cities built according to cult images have failed repeatedly as human habitats. Because its practices are based on an ideology that goes against human nature, the establishment is forced to expend increasing efforts in maintaining a deception. The establishment’s alliance with politicians works through corruption, not the public benefit. 

8. Obstacles to change: After many decades of applying a convenient top-down industrial model, the construction system is now used to implementing cult images using a very narrow palette of materials. The largest (most powerful) industries continue their pact with the establishment’s propaganda machine, and politicians are tied into and support the existing apparatus. Architecture schools are totally fanaticized to support this arrangement, even though it makes them ideological slaves. The media is manipulated to deny evidence for the severe failures of the establishment’s products. 

9. Facilitators for change: Clients realize that our product is measurably better for business. Citizens realize that we can build a healthier human environment. Some students realize the grand deception of their education geared towards maintaining an elite group in power. The energy crisis exposes the establishment’s deceptive claims to sustainability and ecological adaptation. Smaller industries were marginalized by a centralization of power that favors iconic architects, thus growing resentment is building up against multinational firms and their local agents. 

10. Our strengths: Our method co-involves a variety of participants, from small and local industries to individual end-users, opening up significant opportunities for local economic regeneration. Our entire approach is open and honest, in contrast to the mysticism and deception of the establishment. We understand buildings and cities using science, and can clearly explain concepts on how to create a much healthier environment. We link to other disciplines (science, medicine, psychology, computer science, tradition), whereas the architectural establishment is intellectually isolated within its ideology. 

11. Our weakness: We are so far a small minority fighting a huge international propaganda machine that imposed anti-historical and anti-vernacular prejudices on the population. The majority believes the establishment’s media-based deceptive images and is either uninterested or terrified to consider any alternatives. Ordinary people are not scientifically literate, thus they cannot always appreciate our arguments. We cannot offer politicians the same rewards (corrupt but substantial) they now get from being allied to the establishment. 

12. Inside allies: Resistance has to initiate from disillusionment within the architectural and building community. Local building industries could work together to regain independence from a system that now gives everything away to multinationals and their mercenary cult architects. Allies in academia exist in faculties of Architectural History, Engineering, Construction Science, Medicine, and Computer Science. Those institutions, reinforced and linked via Information and Communications Technologies, can train the next generation of architects outside the establishment-controlled architectural design studios. 

13. Outside allies: The scientific, medical, and computer science communities, because they already understand biological complexity, body-environment interactions, and the use of Patterns in design. The grass roots political movement based on open source and peer-to-peer processes. Proponents of traditional culture and values who have lived through the failures of ideological modernism. The broader religious community (but not the group sponsoring new churches in the form of architectural cult images), since the establishment elite dangerously favors a fundamentalist substitute religion. 

14. Avoid the strongest points of the establishment: A voracious economic/financial system supporting a self-referential cultural elite. It totally controls academia, biased architectural prizes and competitions, architectural journals, and is in collusion with governments and major construction companies. Architects subservient to the cult of images have lost all sense of ethics and humanity. Leave faculties of architectural design alone; they will eventually become extinct because of their own irrelevance. 

15. Criticize the weakest points of the establishment: The establishment made a pact with a handful of multinationals to help them obtain all the major building contracts in every country in the world. This arrangement destroyed regional architecture and local building traditions. Unsustainable and unhealthy iconic typologies require tremendous energy wastage. Anti-human practices (as proven by scientific research) supported by a nonsensical theoretical basis, a self-referential ideological framework that protects itself from outside scrutiny, and self-promotion based on deception. People’s mental health is sacrificed in the adoration of cult symbols and heroes. The establishment destroys historical culture (perceived as a plus by some groups on the political left), yet tradition contains invaluable evolved solutions that are applicable today. 

16. First stage of progress: The establishment is arrogant in its absolute power and ignores our resistance movement. By refusing to comment on it, the establishment cleverly does not legitimize the existence of an alternative. Our task is to generate interest by going around the media blackout and general indifference to available alternatives. 

17. Second stage of progress: The establishment perceives a threat to its hegemony and proposes a limited accommodation. This ploy to co-opt the resistance movement should be avoided. The establishment preaches hatred towards living form (biophilic structure, fractals, ornament), and has spent all of its resources training its followers in techniques for gaining and holding onto power. There can be no negotiation between a cult philosophy that promotes a lifeless ideological conception of the built environment, and a movement to create biophilic architecture. 

18. Third stage of progress: We can now lead a parallel co-existence as an alternative to the architectural establishment. Groups that supported iconic architecture and industrial urbanism (media, builders, politicians, professional organizations) realize that change is in the air, and so we must give them signals that it is in their interest to actively switch their support to us. Focus on the potential benefits for those groups adopting our methods, while delegitimizing the establishment’s methods. Those groups continuing to work with the establishment henceforth risk public condemnation. 

19. Fourth stage of progress: The establishment’s power structure begins to unravel, and its members become concerned for their own survival. The establishment is well equipped to engage in deceptive transformation, adopting our vocabulary and superficially copying our methods so as to replace us while retaining its original hegemony. Our writings propose a checklist to make sure that new architectural and urban projects are life-affirming, regardless of their authors’ deceptive claims. The establishment is built upon power plays and the practice of deception; we survive by contrasting our scientific knowledge against our competitors’ empty ideology. 

20. Fifth stage of progress: Industry realizes the advantages of building on an economic scale, using local materials in a way that feeds back into the local economy. In a new open system of peer-to-peer participation, politicians are obliged to stop selling out to the multinationals, and instead begin supporting local businesses. The key to preventing us from being substituted by the establishment is a spontaneous and pragmatic change in the system structure from top-down to peer-to-peer. This new operational framework will provide checks and balances that help prevent a new power elite from merely taking over the old system. 


[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Articles]]