
* '''Moyer, Bill. The Practical Strategist: Movement Action Plan (MAP) strategic theories for Evaluating, Planning and Conducting Social Movements. Social Movement Empowerment Project, San Francisco, 1990.'''

=Description=

"Bill Moyer (1933- 2002) was an activist engaged in movements for civil rights, peace
and the environment for close to 40 years. Initially trained as an engineer, Bill was
introduced to the philosophy and pactice of non-violence by Quaker friends,
completed a degree in social work and became involved in campaigns for civil
rights and housing integration, working closely with Martin Luther King and the
other leaders of the Southern Christian Leader’s Conference during the summer of
1966.

Over the next decade, Bill would be involved in SCLC's Poor People's Campaign in
Washington (1968), nonviolent blockades of arms shipments to Bangladesh (1971)
and to Vietnam (1972), support for the AIM Indians occupying a trading post in
Wounded Knee (1973) and a nuclear power plant blockade at Seabrook, New
Hampshire (1977).

It was during the non-violent blockade of the Seabrook nuclear plant, which
involved the participation of more than 1000 individuals, that Moyer recognised the
need for social change activists to understand the dynamics behind movement
success, and in particular, to address the contradiction that activists often percieve
the normal signs of campaign progress as signs of failure.

The Movement Action Plan (MAP) is one of the tools developed by Bill to achieve
this end, and has been used to train hundreds of activists, most notably in Australia,
Canada and across Europe."



=More Information=

* Bill Moyer died in October 2002. His last book (DOING DEMOCRACY, published by
New Society Publishers earlier that year) summarises his theory of social change.

* A full obituary for Bill can be found at the Resource Centre of Non-Violence
website: http://www.rcnv.org

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Books]]