
'''Stray Cinema'''

URL = http://www.straycinema.com./


=Description=

"Stray Cinema is an open source film. Here you are able to download and re-edit the raw footage from a film we have shot in London. This will provide people from all over the world with an opportunity to create their own version of the film. Stray Cinema will navigate the film experiment out of the online digital world, into the 'real world' with a screening of the top five films in London. The footage shot in London is the first of many open source films to be provided by Stray Cinema."


=Discussion=

Michelle Hughes, co-founder, responds to some comments by [http://indiworks.blogspot.com/2006/11/open-source-film-making-contest.html Valentin Spirik], at
http://indiworks.blogspot.com/2006/11/open-source-film-making-contest.html

"I think an important aspect of the open source movement, and one which we have embraced in our own project Stray Cinema, is easy access to malleable data and information for the wider community online. We want to provide as many people as possible with the opportunity to obtain our footage and have a say over what story is told with it, using the all powerful medium of film. Because we provide over an hours worth of raw footage for people to remix, it is for practical reasons that we have decided to make it available for download at low resolution. Many people do not have access to high speed broadband (ha, for example it is especially difficult for me living in NZ with our current broadband situation, to download large quantities of data). For this reason it is vital we make the footage available as small files (total 130MBs).

Another important component to the Stray Cinema project is that asides from being an open source film, it is also a competition, with the top five films (voted by our online community) shown at a London screening. We have made it a competition, to provide an incentive for our users to bring back the films they have made with our footage, by uploading their version back onto our website. To make it fair for all participants in the Stray Cinema competition, all film submissions should be the same quality in resolution."
(http://indiworks.blogspot.com/2006/11/open-source-film-making-contest.html)


=More Information=

See our entry on [[Open Source Film Making]]


[[Category:Webcasts]]