
=Description=

From the Wikipedia [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strategic_intelligence] :

"Strategic intelligence (STRATINT) pertains to the collection, processing, analysis, and dissemination of intelligence that is required for forming policy and military plans at the national and international level. Most but not all of the information needed for strategic reflections comes from [[Open Source Intelligence]].

Strategic intelligence pertains to the following system of abilities that, according to Michael Maccoby, characterize some of the most successful leaders in business and government:

* foresight, the ability to understand trends that present threats or opportunities for an organization;

* visioning, the ability to conceptualize an ideal future state based on foresight and create a process to engage others to implement it;

* system thinking, the ability to perceive, synthesize, and integrate elements that function as a whole to achieve a common purpose.

* motivating, the ability to motivate different people to work together to implement a vision. 

Understanding what motivates people is based upon another ability, personality intelligence .
partnering, the ability to develop strategic alliances with individuals, groups and organizations. This quality also depends on personality intelligence.

Recent thought leadership on strategic intelligence focuses on the consequences of the modern information age, which has led to the availability of substantial volumes of information than previously encountered. Alfred Rolington, the former CEO of Jane’s Information Group and Oxford Analytica, recommends that intelligence organizations approach the challenges of the modern information age by breaking from their traditional models to become more deeply and continuously inter-linked. Specifically, Mr. Rolington advocates more fluid, networked operating methods that incorporates greater open-sourced information and data in analysis."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strategic_intelligence)


[[Category:Intelligence]]