
=Discussion=

==The three corridors and logistic nexuses==

Barry K. Gills and Andre Gander Frank:

Three magnets of attraction for political-economic expansion stand out. One is sources of human (labor) and/or material (land, water, raw materials, precious metal, etc.) and technological inputs into the process of accumulation. The second is markets to dispose of one zone's surplus production in exchange for more inputs, and to capture stored value. The third, and perhaps most significant, are the most privileged nexuses or logistical corridors of interzonal trade. Bottleneck control over the supply routes of raw materials, especially of metals and other strategic materials, plays a key role in attracting powers to such areas. This may also provide a basis upon which to make a bid for expansion of "Imperial power. Especially here, economic, political, and military conflict and/or cultural, "civilizational," religious, and ideological influence all offer special advantages for tapping into the accumulation and the system of exploitation of other zones to benefit one's own accumulation. Therefore, it is not mere historical coincidence that these three nexus areas have recurrently been the fulcra of rivalry, commerce, and of religious and other cultural forms of diffusion.

Certain strategically placed regions and corridors have played such especially important roles in world system development. They have been magnets which attracted the attention of expansionist powers and also of migrants and invaders. Major currents of thought also migrated through them. This attention is based on their role in the transfer of surplus within the world system, without which the world system not exist. Certain metropoles have become attractive in and of themselves due to their positions along trade corridors, the growth of a-market within the metropolitan city, and the accumulated wealth of the metropole itself. The rise and fall of great regional metropolitan centers and their "succession" reflects extra regional changes in which they participate. For example, the succession of metropoles in Egypt from Memphis to Alexandria to Cairo reflects fundamental underlying shifts in world system structure. So does the succession in Mesopotamia from Babylon to Seleucia to Baghdad.

Three nexus corridors have played a particularly pivotal and central logistical interlinkage role in the development of the world system.

1 '''The Nile-Red Sea corridor''' (with canal or overland connections between them and to the Mediterranean Sea, and open access to the Indian Ocean and beyond).

2 '''The Syria-Mesopotamia-Persian Gulf corridor''' (with overland routes linking the Mediterranean coast through Syria, on via the Oromes, Euphrates, and Tigris rivers, to the Persian Gulf, which gives open access to the Indian Ocean and beyond). This nexus also offered connections to overland routes to Central Asia.

3 '''The Aegean-Black Sea-Central Asia corridor''' (connecting the Mediterranean via the Dardanelles and Bosporus to the overland silk roads to and from Central Asia, from where connecting routes extended overland to India and China).

The choice between the two primarily sea-route corridors mostly fell to the Persian Gulf route. It was both topographically and climatically preferred to the Red Sea route. Moreover, the Persian Gulf corridor had connecting routes overland to Central Asia, which came to serve as a central node in the transfer of surplus among the major zones of the world system.

'''These three nexus corridors represented not only mere routes of trade. Repeatedly, they were integrated zones of economic and political development and recurrently the locus of attempts to build imperial systems.''' As the world system expanded and deepened, attempts were made by certain powers to place either two or all three corridors under a single imperial structure. Thus, such a power would control the key logistical interlinkages which have been central to the world system. For instance, the Assyrian empire attempted to control both the Syria-Mesopotamia corridor and the Nile-Red Sea corridor, but succeeded only briefly and sporadically. The Persian empire likewise controlled both these corridors for a time, and it also had partial control over the Aegean-Black Sea-Central Asia corridor. Thus the Persian empire is the first historical instance of a "three-corridor hegemony." Alexander the Great's grand strategic design for a world empire, or "world system hegemony," included plans to control all three corridors, plus the Indus complexes and the west Mediterranean basin. His successors split the Macedonian conquests almost precisely into realms parallel to the three corridors. They allowed the Indus to fall from Seleucid influence to the Mauryan empire and the west Mediterranean basin to control by Carthage and Rome. During the Hellenistic period, the recurrent rivalries between the Ptolemaic and Seleucid dynasties are indicative of continued struggles between the corridors for a privileged position in the world system's accumulation processes. Even the Roman imperium did not entirely unify the three corridors, however, since Mesopotamia was denied to Rome first by the Parthians, and later by the Sassanian Persians. They used their control of this area to extract considerable profit from the trade among Rome, India, and China.

Of course, each of these three main corridors had competing/complementary alternative variants and feeder routes of its own. For instance, there were several silk roads between East and West and different feeder routes in east and Central Asia and to/from south Asia. There were also routes connecting northern and western Europe through the Baltic Sea via the Dnieper, Don, Volga, and other Ukrainian and Russian routes. There were routes connecting the Adriatic to continental Europe, and the east Mediterranean to the west Mediterranean. Similarly, topological and other factors also favored some locations and routes as magnets of attraction and logistic nexuses in and around Asia. They deserve much more attention than they have received in world history. As the Afro-Eurasian nexus expanded and deepened, the number and role of these routes and choke-points increased. At the same time, their relative importance changed vis-à-vis each other as a result of world system development. Locations such as the Straits of Malacca and of Ceylon had significant logistical roles for very long periods of world system development.

The three overland and sea-route corridors and their extensions were the most important nexuses between Europe and Asia for two millennia before the shift to transoceanic routes in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. This historic shift from the centrality of the three corridors to that of transoceanic logistical interlinkages was probably the single most important logistical shift in world history and world system development. However, rather than creating it as Wallerstein (1974) argues, the shift occurred within the already existing world system."

(http://abuss.narod.ru/Biblio/WS/ws-5000_2.htm)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]