
=Source=

'''* Report: Urban Commons Shared Spaces. By Jens Kimmel, Sophie Bloemen and Till Gentsch. Commons Network and Raumlaborberlin, 2018'''

URL = http://www.commonsnetwork.org/news/shared-spaces-new-paper-on-urban-commons/


=Text=

by Jens Kimmel, Sophie Bloemen and Till Gentsch:

"We will now present strategies & concrete policies to protect and
strengthen commons in urban environments on the basis of our
findings in Amsterdam and Berlin.


We have identified two levels of solutions:

* Creating a commons sector: Legal norms

i.e. Legal recognition, policies and new forms of ownership.


* Collaborative city: Processes and dialogue

i.e. Relationships, dialogue and bureaucracy.


===Creating a commons sector: Legal norms===

====Recognition of Commons as category====
 
The concept of commons and their potential role in urban development is not yet widely known among most administrators and
politicians of Amsterdam and Berlin. In order to truly recognize
the commons domain it needs to be recognized as a category by
policymakers and used and referred to in policy documents, legal
texts and municipal notes. We would propose to develop and add
‘Commons’ as a legal category, through which it becomes a valid
third domain - next to the public and private domains - to explore
when urban development is concerned. Moreover, specific commons initiatives can be involved - just like public, semi-public and
private actors - and given a role in order to address pressing local
social, environmental and cultural issues.


====Securing space for commons and commoning====

Whereas the Amsterdam Broedplaatsen policy temporarily secures
space for ‘creatives’, we envision a policy with a broader scope
that targets existing communities and helps to create new ones.
Amsterdam and Berlin are decor to the re-invigoration of community initiative but, at the same time, witness the sell-off and
disappearance of shared spaces: building
demolish a former school or office or accept another commercial
terrace on a public square.


====='''Example: Naples’ commons areas'''=====

Naples’ municipal government recently passed the Resolution no.
446/2016 whose objective is: “the identification of areas of civic
importance ascribed to the category of the commons”. Vacant public and even private buildings – if for three times within one year
the owner does not reply – are identified as ‘’common good’’ and,
as such, made available to community initiatives.


====='''Example: Right to Bid'''=====

The Right to Bid, one of the so-called Community Rights of the
UK, lays down the procedure by which neighbourhoods nominate
buildings or public spaces as Assets of Community Value (ACV),
defined as ‘’a local building or piece of land which the community
considers to be of particular value to the local community’’. When
the owner of an ACV wants to sell or demolish the property, the
local government must be informed which, in turn, must pause the
process and give the community the time and opportunity to make
a first ‘bid’: a proposal to develop and use the building or piece of
land collectively.


====='''Example: Re-municipalisation: Vorkaufsrecht'''=====

Housing as a Commons. In Berlin a long-existing judicial tool
has recently been reapplied to the housing market. The so-called
Vorkaufsrecht constitutes the remunicipalization of housing in
the city. It states that city boroughs must approve pre-sale market
prices in ‘areas of conservation’.

The boroughs juxtapose sales prices and rents and, if the former
shows a disproportionate disconnect with the latter, hold the right
to stop the sale and set a lower price. Usually public housing corporations are prioritized as buyers of the now cheaper properties. By using the Vorkaufsrecht t take houses out of the heated market, housing is remunicipalized and slows down speculation and gentrification.


====Property forms accommodating the commons====

When city space – buildings, land or public space – is categorized
as a commons, being neither private nor public property, who
then ‘owns’ these spaces? From a commons point of view the answer would be the community understood in the broadest sense,
including members new and old, permanent and temporary, and
those who would want to use it collectively to develop initiatives
that add social, cultural or ecological value to their neighbourhoods. The possibility of people ‘owning and managing city space
together’ city space depends on the availability of adequate legal
entities that accommodate commons. Such property forms would 
allow people to secure buildings and public spaces for commoning
in the long term and fend off market speculation and reprivatization. To do this, we suggest to explore ownership structures and
propose a few directions of inquiry and inspiration.

=====1. Community land trusts=====

A community land trust (CLT) is a non-profit, community-based
organization designed to ensure community stewardship of land. A
CLT is a neutral and sustainable model for affordable housing and
community development that was born in the Unites States and
slowly spread to Canada and the UK over the past 40 years but was
not, however, ever introduced in Germany or the Netherlands.32
CLTs are shielded from the grievances of the market as ownership
by a single person, public or private, is impossible. Instead, the
land is owned collectively and individuals enter into lease agreements with the community. CLTs secure tenure for community
members while at the same time maintaining affordability. Oftentimes, CLT boards are composed of community members allowing
for direct control over city spaces.


======Example: St. Clement’s community land trust======

After years of campaigning by the East London Community Land
Trust (ELCLT), the former St. Clement’s hospital in East London was
redeveloped into a CLT housing project consisting of 23 family
homes. With the project, the ELCLT has succeeded in detaching
housing prices from the property market and, instead, established a
link with local income to create affordable family homes.33


=====2. Legal personhood for city space=====

An area rather uncharted yet worth exploring is one in which city
space is not owned at all by attributing legal personhood to parks,
squares or even buildings itself. This will make it impossible to
own, buy, sell individually or use exclusively the city space in question. The advantage in terms of protecting commons in the urban
environment is that such spaces will no longer be subject to the
profit-driven grievances of private or public owners and, hence,
provide a long-term fertile ground for community-based practices.
This legal approach to city space assumes that communities using
the building or park are fluid, with permanent and temporary
members entering and exiting continuously and acquiring user
rights flexibly.

======Example: New Zealand’s national parks and rivers======

New Zealand provides an interesting example of new legal models for the commons. A former national park as well as the third
largest river in the country have been granted legal personhood
after negotiations between the New Zealand government and
Maori groups culminated in the Te Urewera Act 2014. The decisions
were inspired by the Maori philosophy that views and treats rivers,
mountains and meadows as living entities rather than property.34


=====3. Commoning using current legal forms=====

Each country in Europe has its own juridical palette of ‘legal persons’, composing of, for instance, associations, foundations and
cooperatives. Many have been used in different contexts to allow
for city space as a commons. Given the huge diversity among commons initiatives and host countries, some might benefit more from
being governed as a foundation, while others have more chance of
being successful as a cooperative, while still others are organized
more complexly using different legal forms and multiple layers of
owners, stakeholders and participants. In other words, it is hard
to find the ‘one-size-fits-all’ ownership structure that fits commons initiatives in the city in general. As a source of inspiration,
therefore, let us give three examples of commons initiatives that
work(ed) with different existing legal forms in order to develop.

======Example: The foundation======

The ‘House of the Neighborhood’ De Meevaart in the East of Amsterdam is one of the few examples in the city that has been developed specifically as a commons. De Meevaart is formally governed
by the foundation called Meevaart Ontwikkel Groep (MOG), which
strictly maintains a facilitative role while leaving the exploitation of
and programming in the property to neighbours and citizens of the
‘Indian Neighborhood’. Despite the commons approach, ownership
is still in the hands of the housing corporation De Alliantie.35
In Switzerland, in contrast, the Trias Foundation takes out loans
and purchases land lots including the buildings on it as to provide
community groups with the necessary spaces to develop their
social and cultural initiatives. It ‘separates the ownership of land
and buildings’ by leasing the land to them – which is used to repay
Trias’s debt – hereby granting them ownership over what is built or
grown on it.

======Example: The limited-liability company and the association======

The Mietshauser Syndikat is a German joint venture that has been
deploying different, collective ownership structures as of the early
1990s, mostly using it to prevent significant rises in housing prices
and applying it to cooperative housing projects across Germany.
Technically, the Syndikat uses the legal entity of Limited Liability
Company to facilitate groups of people – organized as an association – wanting to buy a house together but lacking the necessary
resources without starting capital. Every housing association is 
veto-carrying member in the general Syndikat which makes it hard
if not impossible to reprivatize.

======Example: The cooperative======

European cities have a long and rich history of the use cooperatives
as a legal form, especially in Amsterdam. They have been used in
various pockets of society such as food production and distribution, housing, youth and elderly care and even banking (not necessarily producing commons) but also, more recently, city space.

The commons initiative Open Coop in the North of Amsterdam did
flourish both as a collectively managed home base of a group of
artists and as a central and cohesive force in its neighbourhood.
The cooperative had to abandon the idea of full ownership in 2015
due to, the municipality’s unwilling stance toward selling off land
to ‘unorganized groups’.


====Civic procurement====

Recognizing commons both politically and legally would open the
door to establishing the right of civic entities to take responsibility
over their environment. Competent community groups in Amsterdam and Berlin are already performing several public tasks and
services without proper recognition and corresponding funding.
Whereas semi-public and private entities have built up institutional status in public service procurement (e.g. energy supply, physical and psychological healthcare, poverty reduction), the civic
realm cannot yet count on such treatment and, hence, social value
is easily lost. In the Netherlands, the Informatieblad Maatschappelijk aanbesteden (Information Sheet Civic Procurement38 ) has
been the start of a shift toward ‘‘civic procurement’’ of public
services through the ‘‘inevitable process’’ of turning to flexible,
social value-focused communities as opposed to bureaucratic and
cost-efficiency-focused, ‘professional’ organizations. We suggest
to legally codify civic procurement by community groups and take
the first steps toward implementation on the municipal level.IX

=====Example: Right to challenge=====

The Community Right to Challenge, part of the UK’s Localism Act,
constitutes the right for community groups to submit an expression of interest in running services of local authority and fire and
rescue authorities on behalf of that authority.’ Whenever people
feel they can deliver the service better, more efficient, they can
present their proposal to which the local authorities are obliged to
listen.

=====Example: United Kingdom Public Services Bill=====

Already proposed by conservative MP Chris White in 2012, the
Public Services Bill requires public authorities at the early stages
of public service procurement to weigh in the economic, social
and environmental consequences of the contact. The law requires
contractors to serve the community and emphasize social rather
than commercial value. Community-based social initiatives (or the
Urban commons) naturally qualify as they are rooted in community
and operate on a non-profit basis.


===Collaborative city: Processes and dialogue===

The common thread of commoners who organize activities using
Amsterdam’s and Berlin’s buildings, parks and squares, and try to
collaborate with the municipality or its boroughs, is a practical
one: frustration over day-to-day bureaucratic hurdles put up by
the administrations that make operating unnecessarily hard. At
the same time, these obstacles offer opportunities to facilitate and
strengthen Urban commons on the process level.

====Civil servants for the Commons====

Commoners and their initiatives would benefit much from having
central points of contact within the municipality instead of having
to communicate and deal with different departments and administrators, as is the situation today. These contacts should have a
good overview of the sometimes intricate jungle of relevant rules
and regulations, and might be granted extra autonomy in managing permits and budgets as to facilitating the work of commoners effectively.

Ideally, these positions should not be part of a single department,
such as social or economic affairs, but act as an independent
‘commons agency’ as to fully acknowledge the holistic nature of
the urban commons, which simultaneously relate to the social,
economic, environmental and cultural domains.

=====Example: Gebiedsmakelaar Amsterdam=====

Here we can take the Amsterdam example of what it calls ‘gebiedsmakelaars’: civil servants responsible for connecting with, facilitating and keeping in touch with citizen initiatives in their neighbourhood. Although the effort to bridge the administrative world and civil society people is exemplary, the ‘gebiedsmakelaars’ are currently at the bottom of the municipal hierarchy and, hence, lack
real power and budget necessary to be truly effective.

====Budgets and funding====

A general frustration among commoners concerns funding. On the
one hand, there is the problem of bureaucracy which strictly separates municipal departments, their tasks and their budgets. While,
more often than not, commons projects fall in different policy categories (e.g. poverty, youth, integration, culture, healthcare, social 
cohesion, sports, sustainability), city budgets are predominantly
demarcated along clear departmental lines.

On the other hand, time-consuming evaluation procedures are
in place in Amsterdam as well as Berlin that require commoners
to invest a disproportional chunk of their time on paperwork and
reporting. In the words of one interviewee: “the time I spend on
the evaluation cost me half the subsidy”. While a proper application
mechanism is necessary when public money is concerned, these
funding structures clearly present big obstacles to commoners and
their initiatives. 


Hence, we recommend to relieve to the largest
extent possible the bureaucratic burden by 

i) integrating departmental budgets into a ‘’commons’’ or ‘’community’’ fund and 

ii) installing a ‘minimal paperwork evaluation’ procedure for smallscale funding.


=====Example: Decide Madrid and Budget Partcipatif Paris=====

Both the French and the Spanish capital have been experimenting
with participatory budgeting on quite an impressive scale. In both
cases, approximately 100 million euros was distributed through online portals where the cities’ inhabitants suggested proposals, voted on them and eventually decided how to spend the public money.

Participatory budgets in both cases are no longer structured along
strict departmental lines but rather concerns an integrated public
fund which various initiatives and proposals can appeal to. While
this provides clarity and relieves the application process of some of
its heavy administrative burden, demanding evaluation procedures
often remain in place.

=====Example: Breda Begroot=====

In Breda, a small city in the South of the Netherlands, the municipality has reached a next phase in borough budgeting after a
succesful pilot in two of its boroughs which started in 2015. Currently, the policy is being extended and implemented in six other
boroughs. Breda Begroot gives citizens transparency over borough
budgets and a stake in deciding how the public money is spent by
organizing events and playing the so-called ‘course card game’
which helps to flesh out concrete priorities.


====Reducing regulatory burdens for commoners====

Many commoners in both Amsterdam and Berlin run into a vast
regulatory web when starting an initiative. As a result, they find
themselves dealing with countless rigid permit procedures, such
as those regarding the temporary use of public space, the selling
of food and drinks, fire security, street advertisements, and noise
nuisance. Moreover, such procedures might require commoners
to get into the details involved in the planned activity regarding,
for example, the specific time window, number of attendees, the
format and even the outcomes. In contrast, however, commons
initiatives can be open-ended and adaptive processes. An initiative,
like a community art exposition or an outdoor neighbourhood
market is often the start of an open process, which will be shaped
by the members of the community that is created. Predefining the
process and its outcomes will likely undermine the exercise. While
regulation in the public domain is not redundant, the work of
commoners would benefit much when regulatory burdens would
be significantly mitigated and take into account the open-ended
character of commons initiatives.


=====Example: Denmark’s Burden Hunter=====

The Danish business sector provides an interesting source of inspiration for what ‘cutting red tape’, or mitigating regulatory burdens,
could look like. Internationally praised for their ‘smart regulation’,
the Danish Business Authority has managed to identify redundant
obstacles for business entrepreneurs in various sectors of the
economy and eliminate them. To do so, it has set up a ‘cross-governmental innovation unit’ called Mindlab which maps barriers
and obstacles resulting from excessive state bureaucracy using
mixed-methods studies of operating processes of companies.


=====Example: Freezones and umbrella permits in Amsterdam=====

Amsterdam’s city boroughs are experimenting with so-called
regulatory freezones. As of 2015, three freezones have been started
in the city boroughs West, Nieuw-West and South which means
that municipal regulations and permit requirements for all sorts of
issues will be loosened for a period of two years.44
The umbrella permit, first issued by the city borough Amsterdam
North for the hugely successful commons Noorderparkkamer (a
community-based social and cultural hub in the Noorderpark), was
designed to eliminate regulatory burdens for individual initiatives
using Noorderparkkamer’s spaces. Instead, one permit has been
issued comprising all activities and commoners using the space
together.


====Urban stewardship====

Urban planning and maintenance are often a centralized and
exclusive process, and need to become more inclusive and decentralised. A step in this direction is the policy by the dutch government called ‘omgevings visies’ (visions for the urban environment),
which will be implemented between 2019 and 2021. As opposed to
its prescriptive policy predecessors – ‘this block will have so many
houses, so many schools and so many sport fields’, it is largely
descriptive - ‘this block will be used for housing, education and
sports’ - which in theory provides a nice degree of flexibility and
room for initiative. However, as citizen participation is not made
explicit in the law, it seems that they will play only a marginal role 
– as opposed to ‘professional’ initiative – in the development of
both omgevingsvisies and city blocks.

We suggest to make this role explicit. Examples are ‘citizen juries’,
gebiedstafels (borough platforms) or neighbourhood budgets.46
There are many ways to facilitate a significant role for citizens in
the maintaining and caring for public spaces, buildings in their
neighbourhood. In any case, the process of neighbourhood planning and urban stewardship, we argue, should be transparent,
include existing and new communities at the very early stages
and structurally facilitate their participation. Moreover, in order
to maintain flexibility at the end of planning cycles, we suggest to
develop a simple procedure for initiatives deviating from conventional urban planning based on their added social value and local
connections.

=====Example: Bologna’s collaboration agreements=====

The city of Bologna developed with its “Regulation on the Collaboration between Citizens and the City for the Care and Regeneration
of Urban commons” an alternative to a rigid, top down administrative approach. Collaboration among the city officials and civil
initiatives is manifested through “non authoritative administrative acts”. Today about 300 different “collaboration agreements”
– contracts between the Bolognese city government and citizen
initiatives have been made, including, for example, a self-organized
Kindergarten an urban agricultural coop.47 The policy is not perfect, however. Despite the huge energy it elicits in Bolognese civil
society and the alternative it offers to mere top down government,
it fails to move away significantly from a centralized power structure with an emphasis on temporality – giving initiatives a few
years to try before the next one moves in – and to a model in which
public finances and decision-making shifts to local communities.48

=====Example: Resolution 99 from Utrecht=====

The city council of the Dutch city Utrecht has, already in 2016,
passed Resolution 99 which focuses on inclusive urban planning. A
few points from the resolution: 

1) take social value into consideration in urban development; 

2) work on establishing open, inclusive
planning processes from projects’ start-up phases; 

3) establish a
connection between the development and the use of buildings and
blocks; 

4) work on achieving a level-playing field for local initiatives and developers."



[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]