
'''= who volunteer to provide  care at political events like marches, demonstrations, sitins, and occupations."'''


URL = http://medic.wikia.com/wiki/Street_medic

=Description=

Rosehip Medic Collective:

"Street Medics – also known as “action” or “activist 
medics” – are ﬁrst aid responders, healthcare workers, 
and other wellness enthusiasts who volunteer to provide 
care at political events like marches, demonstrations, sitins, and occupations. Medics usually work either on foot  with kits or in temporary clinics.

Street medicking emerged in its current form during 
the U.S. movements of the 1960s and 70s (see History 
section above). Since then, medics have supported a wide 
array of political, social, and environmental movements 
around the world.

As volunteers, street medics are not formally 
integrated into EMS systems (though familiarity with 
their services is sometimes essential) which can be a 
valuable quality when urgent medical care is required 
at sites of political conﬂict. When police or military 
decide to use violent crowd control tactics, ambulances 
and other resources may not be allowed to enter what 
authorities declare an “unsecured scene.” (Remember, 
calling 9-1-1 activates medical services and police!) Even 
when available in the middle of a protest, treatment and/
or transport by EMS professionals may give authorities 
greater ability to identify, detain or arrest protesters. In 
contrast, street medics usually share sympathies with 
participants and may work directly with organizers and 
other infrastructure. This often gives street medics greater 
access and motivation to help in situations where EMS 
workers are unavailable, uncomfortable, or unwanted.

Shared anti-oppression and other principles also may 
make street medics and clinicians the preferred choices 
for those who feel alienated or endangered by corporate/
state-controlled medicine. Street Medics also generally 
share a strong emphasis on consent, mutual aid, patient oriented care, conﬁdentiality, and non-cooperation with police.

In the U.S., street medics often identify themselves 
with red duct tape crosses on clothes and packs. Usually 
working in buddy pairs, medics sometimes coordinate 
as teams for larger events and clinic spaces. A generally accepted minimum level of training to work as a street  medic consists of 20 hours of basic ﬁ rst aid, particulars of 
medicking at political events, and how to deal with police 
weapons and tactics. However, many Street Medics also 
have other kinds of formalized training—as EMTs, nurses, 
Wilderness First Responders, herbalists, acupuncturist 
and others. Street medic groups, independent medics, and 
similar or allied providers exist all over North America 
and many parts of the globe—adapting their training and 
practices to local needs."
(http://www.rosehipmedics.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/Alt2EMSdigitalprintMay9.pdf)




=Example=

"The Rosehip Medic Collective is a group of volunteer 
Street Medics and health care activists in and around 
Portland, Oregon. We provide ﬁ rst aid and emergency 
care at protests, direct actions, and other sites of 
resistance and struggle. We also train other Street Medics 
and put on community wellness trainings. We believe 
in democratizing health care knowledge and skills, in 
reducing our community’s dependence on corporate 
medicine, and that strong networks of support and 
care are essential to building a sustainable, long-term 
movement for collective liberatioWn. We are working to 
create one facet of the healthy and diverse infrastructure 
we see as necessary if we are to build another world. 
Our group includes EMTs, Wilderness First Responders, 
herbalists, and more."
(http://www.rosehipmedics.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/Alt2EMSdigitalprintMay9.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Common Ground Health Clinic]]



[[Category:Health]]

[[Category:Security]]