=Description=

'''1. Herman Daly''', Charles Prugh and Robert Costanza:

"In a strong democracy, people –citizens – govern themselves to the greatest extent possible rather than delegate their power and responsibility to representatives acting in their names. Strong democracy does not mean politics as a way of life, as an all-consuming job, game, and  as it is for so many professional politicians. But it does mean politics (citizenship) as a way of living: an expected element of one’s life. It is a prominent and natural role, such as that of “parent” or “neighbor”."
(via email from Pat Conaty)


'''2. Arran Gare:'''
 
“Strong democracy is a term coined by Benjamin Barber based on
his study of Switzerland. It is associated with taking the notion of
citizenship very seriously, requiring adult members of communities to
take responsibility for the future of their communities and participate in
their governance. It requires education, institutions and media to
achieve the required wisdom to perform this function properly. It is best
achieved through a federal structure which decentralizes power as
much as possible, but requires more local communities to take seriously
the common good of broader communities. Essentially, it is democratic
federalism. This can be extended to the whole of humanity, and the
biotic communities of which humans are part, including Gaia. Strong
democracy involves the subordination of markets to these communities.
The localization of political power and economic processes and
decision-making wherever possible would allow people to more easily
identify exploitation and oppression and eliminate them. The struggle for
this is a struggle against the global corporatocracy and their political
allies, and should be waged as a struggle for liberation to prevent global
ecological destruction.”
(https://www.academia.edu/43252621/Toward_an_Ecological_Civilization_-_An_Interview_with_Arran_Gare?)


[[Category:Democracy]]

[[Category:Democracy]]