=Typology=

==Structural archetypes for group organization==

MFLB:

"In considering the many and various organizational models and principles that have been previously used to coordinate all sorts of groups, a categorical analysis of the primary forms and structures will identify  three basic and fundamental types of decision making process.  For the  purposes of this essay, these three primary forms of decision making will  be referred to as 'the democracy', 'the meritocracy', and 'the consensus'. 

The three notions of an organizing principle can be briefly described  (in a characteristically simplified form) as follows: 

In a democracy, a range of possible options is reviewed, discussion     and persuasion (rhetoric) is followed by a vote, and the majority     decision applies to the whole. 

In a meritocracy, some process (it does not matter which), is used  to select a focus of decision making (a single person or smaller    group), which then (perhaps after listening to the considered    council of others) will make a decision which is applied to the   whole.  It is assumed that the whole will always and implicitly  trust the part to make decisions 'correctly' (whatever that notion  is taken to mean for the whole group). 

In consensus, all members sit in council together and discuss  potential decisions together until a complete and total agreement 
is reached among all members (however long it takes) which then  becomes the decision of the group. 

Of these three basic types of organizing principle, smaller groups will  generally be best organized using the method of consensus. "
(https://mflb.com/civ_dev_1/sgrp_essay_3.html)


==Proposed Hybridization for Small Groups==

"In summary then, there are only three basic methods by which group 
decisions are made.  Each of these methods can be used to make two 
different kinds of decisions, one particular to its own modality, and 
one to act as a check on (to moderate the effects of) each of the 
other two methods of decision making.  Each decision making methodology 
has two primary responsibilities, and all three methods together 
account for all (six) basic aspects of group management.  This overall 
arrangement can be restated more compactly and symmetrically as follows: 

      
That Consensus process, which is based on the total and heartfelt 
agreement of all members of the group, is used to make 
      
1) all of the important decisions about the being, nature, 
and intent of the group and its actions, and 2) selecting 
single individuals to act as a coordinating and decision 
making focus each particular action, and the group member 
who will be responsible for facilitating the next consensus 
decision making meeting of the group (note different people 
may be chosen for each role). 

      
That Executive process, which is based only on the merit and authority 
of the selected focus person, is used to make decisions about 
      
1) the implementation of a specific group external action, and 
      
2) how to best enable the consensus decision making 
process during a group meeting. 

      
That Democratic process, which is based on a spontaneous majority 
vote of those present in any gathering of the group, is used 
to make only two kinds of decisions: 

1) whether to immediately 
suspend the currently pending executive process (i.e., to 
indefinitely suspend the authority of the currently acting 
focus person) and return directly to a consensus decision 
making process, and/or 

2) whether to immediately suspend the 
currently pending consensus decision making process, with 
respect to a particular stalled decision.  (Note; In effect, 
the latter aspect is a transition to a type of executive 
process, usually to select a focus person who will ensure 
that the issue is taken up at some (other) future scheduled 
meeting, or suspended by vote again, if the situation warrants. 
      
It is important to let the stalled decision rest for the 
remainder of the current meeting, so that other issues can be 
discussed if needed). 

Aside from its simplicity, this hybridization has numerous advantages 
for a small group.  Consensus process is used to make all of 
the important decisions which affect the group as a whole.  Consensus 
decision making serves as the foundation for all group activities and 
allows each of the group members to come to know one another more 
deeply.  As such, consensus decision making allows the group as a whole 
to come to one mind about an issue.  In sharing insights each person may 
more easily come to feel good about the decisions that are made.  This 
enables the group to be whole, and acting as a whole, to be strong, 
and thus enabled to work in a healthy and sustainable manner.  Overall, 
the consensus process 
provides the group with the ability to make high quality decisions in 
the places where high quality choices are most needed.  By allowing for 
transition to executive process, the cumbersome aspects of consensus 
decision making are avoided.  By allowing supercession by democratic 
process, a stuck or blocked consensus process can be prevented from 
halting or freezing the group, ensuring that the group as a whole will 
remain responsive, effective, and at peace with itself. 

Executive process allows for the group to have the necessary 
structured organization, responsiveness, and flexibility needed 
to cope with the vast number of details of rapidly changing conditions 
associated with the external environment (and the unexpected dynamics of life). 
Executive process also provides the context and facilitating basis for effective 
consensus decision making within a group.  Overall, the executive 
process provides the group with the ability to make rapid and numerous 
decisions in the situations where immediacy and decisiveness is most 
needed.  By allowing supercession by the democratic process, the 
executive process can be prevented from becoming dominating, or misused, 
ensuring that the group remains healthy. 

Democratic process ensures that neither the consensus process nor 
the executive process ever becomes disabling.  By ensuring that there 
is always a method for checking or relieving problematic situations 
(such as halted or overly contentious group meetings and possible abuses 
of focus authority), these other two forms of decision making are made 
more sure and secure and the problems of rhetoric and loss of essence 
associated with democratic process are avoided. 

Overall, by maintaining a good balance and mixture of these three 
types of decision making processes, the membership of a group should 
be able to integrate in a healthy manner with the strength and 
flexibility necessary for high quality combined works.  The 
particular disadvantages of each type of decision making process are 
offset by a balanced transition to the advantages of each of the other 
types.  In this way, the best of all possible groups can be realized."


=More information=

* Please check the proposed [[Small Group Method]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]