
'''* Article:  Sabu Kohso, Radiation and Revolution'''

URL = http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/kohso_radiation.pdf


=Abstract=

"While we are observing a new cycle of global uprising against capitalism and the state, a catastrophic situation is unfolding in post-3/11 Japan. Two kinds of upheaval appear to be mirroring each other, shaking both capital’s business as usual and the everyday life of the people in positive and negative manners. The earthquake and tsunami of maximal scale devastated the northeastern part of Honshu, with an increasing number of losses and refugees and a worsening and long-lasting nuclear disaster. The activity of the planet has shown not only the magnitude of its nonhuman force but also the degree to which our society and its infrastructural system forged by capitalism are relying on, merging with, implicated in and expanding over the planet in an ominous manner. The event that is unfolding in Japan will inexorably have significant impact over the entire human society ecologically, economically, and socially.

The new situation forces us to re-conceptualize the crucial notions of ‘class struggle’ and ‘commons’. This presents us with two unprecedented conditions: that the survival of the people is becoming more and more synonymous with the class struggle against the projects of the state and capital; and that ‘commons’ entails two extreme poles in its spectrum: while common resources provided by mother earth continue to be our lifeline upon which to build our mutuality (commune), as the apparatus that capitalist civilization has built expands on the planet and becomes deeper and larger, its fissures caused by the wrath of the same source of commons, namely, of mother earth, human society is affected at a deeper and larger scale. But international politics, the divided interests of the nation-states which are epitomized by the concept of ‘the world’, cannot confront these dichotomous poles of commonality at once. It is now necessary to re-introduce the concept of ‘the earth’ as the critical/dialectic counterpart to the world, in order to fully approach the commons. It goes without saying that this earth cannot be reduced to the issue of environmental protection; rather it is the planetary machine with which our class struggle for survival has to synchronize itself. In other words, anti-capitalism is possible today only as a movement to decompose and recompose the apparatus in which our beings on the planet are almost completely implicated."
(http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/kohso_radiation.htm)

=Source=

Special issue of borderlands e-journal, VOLUME 11 NUMBER 2, 2012: Commons, Class Struggle and the World. Editors: Manuel Yang & Jeffrey D. Howison.

See: [[Commons and Class Struggle]] [http://www.borderlands.net.au/issues/vol11no2.html]


=More Information=

* Introduction by Manuel Yang & Jeffrey D. Howison, [[Commons, Class Struggle and the World]], http://www.borderlands.net.au/vol11no2_2012/yanghowison_commons.pdf

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Japan]]

[[Category:Politics]]