
=Source=

* Book: [[Sparking A Worldwide Energy Revolution]]. Social Struggles in a Transition to a Post-Petrol World. Ed. by Kolya Abramsky. AK Press, 2010

URL = http://www.akpress.org/2009/items/sparkingaworldwideenergyrevolution 

'''Chapter 14, Part 4. Struggles Against Privatization of Electricity Worldwide. David Hall on behalf of Public Services International Research Unit'''


=Excerpt=

David Hall:

"This chapter looks at campaigns against electricity privatization: their extent, what
were the issues, who was involved, their use of court cases and electoral campaigns,
and the development of alternative policies.

There has been widespread opposition, throughout the world, to all forms of electricity
privatization—the sale or privatization of distribution networks; the sale or privatization
of existing power plants; the creation of new, private power stations through
IPPs (Independent Power Producers); and management contracts or leases to operate
networks or power stations. This opposition has come from a wide range of civil
society groups, including trade unions, environmentalists, consumer organizations,
community organizations, peasant and indigenous groups, and political parties.

...

These campaigns of resistance have happened
in all regions of the world, and in the high income OECD as well as in developing
countries. This resistance to electricity privatization has been part of a more
general public resistance to all forms of privatization in public services. Despite
initial public support for the idea in the 1990s, experience of privatized utilities,
in particular, rapidly generated opposition. Opinion surveys in Latin America, for
example, showed a dramatic change by 2000, and hostility continued to grow. By
2003, a speaker from management consultant, Deloitte, told a World Bank meeting
that there was hardly a country left where politicians dared to support privatization
of electricity: “Growing political opposition to privatization in emerging markets
due to widespread perception that it does not serve the interests of the population at
large,” which they attributed to a number of features of privatization: “Pressures to
increase tariffs and cut off non-payers; loss of jobs of vocal union members that will
be hard to retrain for the new economy; the perception that only special interests
are served—privatization is seen as serving oligarchic domestic and foreign interests
that profit at the expense of the country …”2 From then on, the pressures have been
reduced, at least in developing countries, because most multi-national companies
have taken strategic decisions to withdraw. But continuing pressures for privatization
in Europe, and general ideological motives, continue to produce privatization
initiatives.

The campaigns have thus tended to be long continuous struggles, because the
proposals for privatization have been continuous. A typical example is the case of
Ecuador, where government attempts to privatize electricity assets have repeatedly
encountered organized resistance including unions, provincial and local governments,
indigenous organizations, and others. In 2002, these campaigns forced the
abandonment of proposals to sell electricity distributors, after Ecuador’s Congress
passed a resolution rejecting the privatization, and a Constitutional Court ruling that
the sales were unconstitutional. A further attempt at privatization was abandoned in
February 2004 when there was not a single tender for any of the companies.


The greatest issue has been the level of prices, but campaigns have also focused
on job losses, failure to invest, unreliability, inefficiency, environmental impact,
policy, loss of public accountability and/or national control, and corruption.

Resistance to large price increases was central in a number of campaigns that
succeeded in rejecting privatizations. In Senegal, for example, the government
refused to meet the demands for price rises of three successive multi-nationals—
Hydro-Quebec, Vivendi, and AES—as a result of which even the World Bank abandoned
the plan for privatization of the electricity utility.

Other campaigns have been based on defending community interests, as well
as resistance to implied price rises, such as the campaign against Enron’s private
power plant at Dabhol (in Maharashtra, India), which was based on a long-term
power purchase agreement. The campaign was supported by energy NGOs opposed
to the project on social, economic, and environmental grounds, and by the local
communities around the plant whose livelihoods were seriously damaged by it.

Demonstrations by the local communities were brutally suppressed (leading to the
unique case of an Amnesty International report on Enron). The power station was
finally nationalized by the Indian government. The long-running campaign against
the proposed private power station at Bujagali falls, in Uganda, was also based on the
impact on the environment and on local communities. The project was abandoned
by the company originally involved, AES, but has since been revived.

Resistance to, and conflicts over, electricity privatization have often formed part
of greater political processes and struggles. In Thailand, for example, a series of demonstrations
and strikes were organised by the Thai electricity workers union from
2004 onwards, highlighting the dangers of privatization in terms of higher prices, the
risk of corrupt allocation of shares to cronies, and the risk of foreign control developing
through buying of shares. In March 2004, the government backed down and
announced the cancellation of the EGAT privatization plans. Following an election,
the government revived the plans; further strikes and demonstrations then formed
part of a movement that culminated in the overthrow of the government, and its
replacement by military rule, followed by new elections, new privatization proposals,
and further action in 2008. In Pakistan, the introduction of IPPs in the 1990s
with excessively generous power purchase agreements resulted in the distribution
company, WAPDA, becoming unviable, as a result of having to buy power at prices
higher than it could charge consumers. The privatization proposals were strongly
resisted by the union, and attempts were made to prosecute the companies involved
in IPPs for corruption, but these prosecutions were dropped at the insistence of the
World Bank, and instead WAPDA was taken over by the military—a precursor of the
subsequent military takeover of the country—and the union was banned.

Most of the campaigns have been led by trade unions. This is based on the clear economic
interest of workers whose jobs and working conditions are threatened, but
the unions have generally campaigned on wider issues of public interest, including
prices and accountability. Environmentalists have been involved in many campaigns,
and, in some cases, have taken a leading role. Community groups, especially where
a private power plant threatens the local environment, and consumer groups, who
became increasingly wary of the price rises associated with privatization, have also
been widely involved.

An outstanding example of this is the union campaign in Thailand, which has
successfully prevented the privatization of the state electricity company, EGAT, by
direct action in the form of strikes, demonstrations, and political action against the
governments that have proposed privatization. Their opposition to privatization was
supported by other organizations, including a number of environmental groups that
developed quite detailed proposals for alternative reforms. The unions, however,
neither advanced any alternatives of their own, nor offered support for the environmentalist
alternative proposals.


==Alternatives==

Examples of alternatives can be categorized according to three major issues: the
need to extend systems to ensure universal connections, the need for transparency,
and the need for efficiency.


The first example concerns the most successful extension of electricity services
in sub-Saharan Africa, in South Africa. The ending of apartheid, following a massive
liberation struggle, created an almost revolutionary situation open to political initiatives,
including a program for electrification of cities and the countryside through
the state electrical utility, ESKOM: “a period of political change and policy disruption
were essential to the program’s initiation, and the critical role played by organizations
and individuals outside of national government in helping shape new electrification
policies and strategies.”8 There was no formal role at all for international institutions
such as the World Bank. Instead—unlike nearly all other programs in Africa—a central
role was played by organizations representing citizens. A key body on the whole
process was a public multi-stakeholder planning institution, the National Electrification
Forum (NELF), “a broad-based stakeholder body with participants from Eskom,
municipalities, the DMEA, unions and others [supported by] … university-based
electricity researchers … and the energy policy analysts/activists in the ANC.” NELF
formed an arena where stakeholders could negotiate the shape of an electrification
program, which would be both politically legitimate and practically implementable,
based on a political acknowledgement of the social function of electrification and
its funding from [public finance]: the end result was the “transition of electrification
from a socially desirable (but economically limited) activity to an imperative,
brought about broadly by a powerful democratic drive and commitment to service
delivery (including the electoral significance of achieving targets).”

Secondly, improving transparency and public accountability is a significant
issue because in almost all countries, the pre-existing public sector organizations
have become unpopular because of a lack of responsiveness to public concerns both
on an individual and a collective basis. Improving transparency also creates a more
favorable political environment for campaigns. The outstanding example of development
of this kind of alternative is the work of the Indian energy group, Prayas
(www.prayaspune.org). Prayas recognizes the achievements of the existing Indian
electricity model, based on state ownership, self-sufficiency, and cross-subsidy to agriculture
and households. In fifty years, capacity has increased fifty-five fold, with 78
million customers, and half a million villages connected. There are, however, limits
to these achievements, and real problems in the sector: half the population is still
unconnected, and there are power shortages, weak accounting and metering, and
huge financial losses. Prayas advocates the application of three principles of transparency,
accountability, and participation (TAP): “all the governance functions and
governance agencies are made amenable, on mandatory basis, to full transparency
to the public, direct accountability to the public, and meaningful participation of
the public.… The three major governance agencies—the state, the utilities, and the
regulatory commissions—could be TAPed in a variety of ways. However, the space
and capabilities of civil society institutions will be the important determinants of
successful TAPing of these agencies” (Prayas 2001). Prayas showed the potential of
these principles by demanding public consultation on price-setting by the distribution
authority in Maharashtra, India, and then successfully advocating operational
changes which enabled significantly lower tariffs. It has published a series of booklets
on this kind of approach.

Thirdly, diagnosis of the problems may identify efficiency as a key issue for
popular reform. In 2008, the National Union of Electricity Employees (NUEE) in
Nigeria, where 70 percent still lack electricity connections, argues that privatization
will lead to the continuing denial of electricity connections to those who currently
do not have access to electricity. The union argues instead that: “the crisis has more to
do with corruption and problems relating to the management of the sector.… Some
of the alternatives proffered by NUEE include the efficient use of Thermal stations
and gas, accurate billing and payment for electricity consumption.” 10 Echoing the
success of the South African multi-stakeholder organization, the NUEE has called
for a summit, “targeted at all stakeholders in the Sector … to assist governments
and the various stakeholders in developing joint strategies and actions to extend and
improve the efficiency of the electricity services and also develop alternative sources
of generating power.”

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Articles]]