=Discussion=

Arran Gare:

"Since the end of the Eighteenth Century there has been a struggle, often confused,
between the humanists associated with the Radical Enlightenment and the atomists
and mechanists associated with the Moderate Enlightenment. The former have
defended the potential of humans through being educated to take responsibility for
themselves, their communities and the future, the latter have claimed that the
distinctive qualities of humans with their apparent consciousness and freedom are
illusions that can be explained away. They have defended egoism in the context of
social mechanisms, most importantly, imposed markets and punitive laws and their
enforcement to protect life and property along with the manufacture of consent to
maintain order. Proponents of the Radical Enlightenment have defended
communitarianism of one form or another while proponents of the Moderate
Enlightenment have defended possessive individualism. For the Radical
Enlightenment, liberty is equated to not being enslaved and being empowered by
developing their potential to participate in the life of their communities; for the
Moderate Enlightenment, liberty is equated with freedom from constraint in private
life, providing the life and property of others are respected. 

The Radical Enlightenment involves a commitment to democracy, while the Moderate
Enlightenment involves efforts to impose and extend markets, and rule by plutocracy.
While often confused, the forms of thinking upholding the Radical Enlightenment
were developed in the humanities where the importance of philosophy, history,
literature and the arts were upheld as essential to the cultivation of character and
advance of civilization, while the forms of thinking upholding the Moderate 
Enlightenment were developed in the sciences and economics faculties of universities.
The two traditions collided in the human sciences, with proponents of the Radical
Enlightenment defending humanistic approaches treating humans as essentially
cultural beings capable of achieving self-determination, and the Moderate
Enlightenment arguing that the human sciences should conform to the natural
sciences and produce the knowledge required to control people efficiently.

It is more complicated than this, however, since many philosophers aligned
themselves with the Moderate Enlightenment, promoting “scientism,” the view that
only science, mathematics and logic provide genuine knowledge, accepting that
history, literature and the arts, or “high culture,” are simply refined amusements.
Almost always, this involved defending reductionist approaches in the sciences with
the conviction that economics and other human sciences could be modelled on and
finally reduced to the natural sciences. In the Twentieth Century this reductionism
was strongly defended through logical positivism. The ultimate aim of such
reductionists has been to reduce all explanations to mathematical models. Conversely,
as I have noted, many mathematicians and scientists have rejected such reductionism
and in the tradition inspired by Schelling and the Naturphilosophen have striven to
overcome reductionism and align the sciences with the humanities (Gare, 2011).

This complication and confusion were vastly increased through the work and
influence of Marx. Marx was and is a major figure in the Radical Enlightenment, being
inspired by the German Renaissance. The triumph of the Moderate Enlightenment
was associated with huge technological advances along with concentrations of wealth,
an industrial revolution, impoverishment of the working class, recurring depressions
and imperialism, mainly by Britain and France. Marx exposed the irrationality and
illusions of freedom created by the Moderate Enlightenment where people were being
alienated from their own work and its products as they were forced to sell their labour
power as a commodity, at the same time, alienating them from each other, from nature
and from their humanity (their “species-being”). Most people in Nineteenth Century
Britain were being reduced to wage-slaves under appalling conditions and people in
colonized countries were being subjugated and impoverished. However, in searching
for a solution to this problem, Marx placed his faith in the growth of the working class
and its potential to take power and gain control over the rapidly developing means of
production. However, he did not publish his Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of
1844 where he analysed alienation, and at one stage, he formulated a theory of history
claiming that the development of the base, consisting of forces of production
(technology) and relations of production, was the driving force in history, with the
superstructure simply serving this base. Marx left it very unclear what kind of social
order could be created to replace capitalism, putting his faith in a revolution that
would establish a ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ without spelling out the implications
of this, even when challenged to do so by the Russian anarchist, Mikhail Bakunin.

Although Marx himself rejected the base-superstructure model of society in his major
work, Capital, having expunged it from the final version (White, p.461), this
characterization of history was embraced by most Marxists, particularly outside the
advanced capitalist countries. What these supposedly orthodox Marxists aspired to
was ‘scientific socialism’ based on a conception of humans far closer to the Moderate
Enlightenment than the Radical Enlightenment. Orthodox Marxism was essentially
Hobbesian Marxism.

With the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, there were many followers of Marx who
understood the radical nature of Marx’s critique of political economy and rejected the
base-superstructure model of society. The most important of these were Alexander
Bogdanov and his brother-in-law, Anatoly Lunacharsky, who became Commissar for
Enlightenment (or Education) (White, 2019). Bogdanov argued that the creation of a
new social order would involve the creation of a new culture (proletkult), incorporating
the best of all previous cultures but going beyond them, overcoming Cartesian
dualism and the mechanistic view of nature and according value to “ideological”
work as well as physical work. With the support of Lunacharsky, this vision inspired
enormous creativity in the 1920s, not only in the arts and humanities, but also in the
development of post-reductionist science, most importantly, ecology, although many
objected to the characterization of this new culture as ‘proletarian’ culture. This
creativity was associated with the discovery and publication of Marx’s Manuscripts of
1844 and other early writings, revealing the deeper assumptions about humans and
humanity driving Marx’s critique of capitalism, and vindicating philosophers such as
György Lukács who had interpreted Marx as a radical Hegelian thinker.

However, orthodox Marxism was used to justify the creation of command
economy, which under Stalin served to rapidly industrialize the Soviet Union, but
effectively enslaved most of the population to a new class of bureaucrats and
technocrats, as Bogdanov had predicted (Gare, 1994). It had no place for those
involved in the creative burst in the arts, the humanities and the sciences in the 1920s,
and many of the major figures in this cultural renaissance were sent to the Gulag.

Some were executed in the 1937 purge. David Riazanov, who founded the Marx-Engels Institute and published Marx’s Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, was executed in 1937. Pavel Medvedev, a member of the famous Bakhtin circle and
author of the brilliant The Formal Method in Literature Scholarship, was arrested in 1930
and shot in 1938. The Bolshevik order facilitated the defence of Russia, but also the
expansion of what was really a Russian Empire. Bolshevism under Stalin proved to be
at least as brutal as capitalism, although this was only fully revealed in the 1950s. "

(https://www.cckp.space/single-post/bp-4-2021-arran-gare-against-posthumanism-posthumanism-as-the-world-vision-of-house-slaves)

[[Category:Cosmobiological]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Cooperative Commonwealth]]