This was copypasta from my old bio page at CoActivate.org:
https://web.archive.org/web/20201111233740/https://www.coactivate.org/projects/disintermedia/danyl-strype/

It needs to be brought up-to-date and tidied up. --[[User:Strypey|Strypey]] ([[User talk:Strypey|talk]])


Danyl Strype (@Strypey)
Community Developer

Realtime Communication

Text chat (XMPP):
strypey@jabber.org
	

Skype: Nope. I'd rather try Mumble, Jitsi Meet, Wire, GNU Ring, and other free code conferencing tools
Delayed Communication
: Email: strypey(-at-)disintermedia(-dot-)net(-dot)nz

Quitter.se (GNU Social): @strypey@quitter.se
: Twitter: @danylstrype (mainly just a copy of what I post on Quitter)

Diaspora:

@strypey@joindiaspora.com
: Medium: @strype (mainly stuff I've written in response to other users there)

Published Writing: Articles I've had accepted on other websites, and self-published stuff from my time publishing on Indymedia
Other Federated Social Networks Accounts I Have Set Up

Hubzilla (Zot, Diaspora protocol, OStatus):
strypey@libranet.de 	Friendica (Diaspora protocol, OStatus):

@strypey@libranet.de
Identi.ca (pump.io): https://identi.ca/strypey 	Libretree: @Danyl Strype
Pleroma (OStatus): @strypleroma@plero.ma 	Quitter.im (OStatus): strypey@quitter.im
Note: I'm most active on a GNU Social site, which can connect with a Fediverse of other social apps, including Mastodon (originally using the OStatus standard, soon to be superseded by the ActivityPub standard). If you are using one of these apps, my GNU Social address @quitter.se is probably the best way to follow or @mention me.


Other Social Networks I've Tried (willing to try again, keen to connect?)
Minds: @strypey 	

­
He Mihi - An Introduction

­Tēnā koutou katoa

No Te Wai Pounamu ahau,
Ko Te Tihi o Kahuhura te maunga,
Ko Ōtākaro te awa,
No Ōtautahi i whānau
Ko La Famiglia Dini, Clan Bruce, Clan Ross, te whanau Efford, ōku whanau

Ko Daniel Strype Bruce tōku ingoa,

E noho ana au i waenganui o ngā puke o Ōpoho, i te kāinga o Ōtepoti.

My name is Daniel Strype Bruce. I come from the islands of Aotearoa in the waters of Te-Moana-Nui-A-Kiwa, renamed 'New Zealand' and 'Pacific Ocean' by the European colonists who built the city of Christchurch where I was born and raised. I  recognise the Tāngata Whenua (first people of this land) of this place, whānau (families) and hapū (communities) of the iwi (tribe) Kai Tahu, who know my city of birth as Ōtautahi. I currently live on the hills of Mornington, in the city of Dunedin.

I am a writer, performer, workshop leader and public speaker, with a track record in community access media, digital communications, and free culture advocacy.

:   In high school, I turned the school's radio club into a consensus-based collective, co-producing magazine-style shows on local access radio station, PlainsFM, for two years.
:   In 1997-98, I was a co-founder of Smog, a community newspaper for the inner-city east area of Ōtautahi (Christchurch), sold advertising to local businesses to help fund it, wrote regular articles, and delivered copies to letterboxes around the neighbourhood. Smog was published at ((Molten Media)), a downtown community media centre providing at-cost access to computers and the internet, and recycling computers, which I was also involved in.
:   In 1999, I co-founded the Mostly Computer Syndicate, a small internet users co-op in Kirikiriroa (Hamilton) which shared computers and a dial-up connection in a central city office.
:   In 2001, I co-founded InterActive, an independent media space in central Ōtautahi (Christchurch). The same year, I was a co-founder of the Aotearoa Independent Media Centre (A-IMC) and the Aotearoa In­dymedia open-publishing news site. I worked actively with the A-IMC network for 7 years, and continued to contribute writing to the website for some years after that.
:   In 2003 I digitally recorded speakers at the Social Forum Aotearoa in Porirua, and in 2005, I helped ((StationFM)) instigator Aaron Mooar (host of Under the Radar on Raglan Community Radio) record the talks given at the EcoShow in Waitakere City. These were uploaded to any audio archive on a server called Paranode, organised through the A-IMC network.
:   From 2003-2009, I was part of ((Indymedia Alternatives)), a working group of the Global Network of Independent Media Centres investigating solutions-orientated media, and online community collaboration. During this work, I came up with the name for SocialForge.net, a side project by some of the people in the working group.
:   In 2003, I completed a Certificate in Linux Administration from NatColl (now YooBee School of Design). 
:   I co-founded information radio station StationFM in 2004, which broadcast from arts and media activism space 'The Commons' in Kirikiriroa.
:   Throughout 2004-8, I set up an email list and maintained a homepage for Aotearoa Information Radio, which facilitated co-operation between micro-radio stations, community access radio, online audio archives, and free code projects for audio, as well as advocating for the use of CreativeCommons.
:   In late 2005, I made contact with the CreativeCommons Affiliate Network and established the cc-nz email list, aiming to kickstart the CreativeCommons Aotearoa/ NZ localisation. I continue to give volunteer time to CC ANZ as a community developer, and adviser to the Project Lead on the ICT and cultural sectors.
:   Since 2006 I have been an interface tester, supporting the lead developer in the open source community of CoActivate.org (formerly OpenPlans.org).

:   In 2006-7, I was co-manager and technical co-ordinator, for the Oblong community internet space, running regular ((Linux Play)) sessions to support the use of free code software.
:   In 2008, I founded the Disintermedia.net.nz project, which aims to support groups developing peer-to-peer solutions to social and environmental problems; building the infostructure of free culture; and defending people's right to privacy, to access knowledge, and to participate in cultural exchange.
:   Also in 2008, I advised the Camp for Climate Action Aotearoa in their use of OpenPlans (now CoActivate.org) for collaboration on documents, and the many email lists they needed to organise the Climate Camp.  
:   In October 2010, I submitted a paper to the FreeCulture2010 research conference in Berlin called Free to Know or Free to Own? Convergence of Free and Slow Culture in Global Relocalisation, and gave a talk on this topic at the Software Freedom Day event in Te Whanganui-a-Tara.
:   In December 2010, I presented a paper called Kei hea ngā kete mātauranga e toru o ēnei wā: Where are the three baskets of knowledge of today? at another research conference at Victoria University, Trade, Intellectual Property and the Knowledge Assets of Indigenous Peoples: The Developmental Frontier.
:   From 2012-14 and since May 2015, I have been part of the open source community developing Loomio, a web application designed to facilitate effective consensus decision-making. I've been an interface tester, and advisor on community decisions like whether to relicense the code from the "MIT" license they started with to the copyleft AGPL license.
:   From May 2014 to May 2015, I did a year long "net fast", and I am working on a book ('((Email Ate My Life))') about the experience, the insights it gave me about the way the net has changed society, and what all this could mean for the future.
:   2015-present: In 2015 I started curating a publicly available list of online videos of talks by women active in the libre commons movements, on the NZ Pirate Party Loomio Group. I moved it to Disintermedia, and continued to add it to it for a while, then it was moved to the wiki of the P2P Foundation.
:   2015-present: In late 2015 I became an admin on CoActivate.org, sharing responsibility for writing more regular site news, and removing fake groups set up by spammers.

As well as free culture and community access media, I am also an advocate of environmental regeneration and economic democracy. After years of self-directed research into creative recycling, organic food production, sustainable manufacturing, renewable energy systems, and intentional community, I completed an intensive ecological design course run by Earthcare Aotearoa at Tui Community, earning a Permaculture Design Certificate.

: In 1999-2000 I was a co-manager and shift manager at the Post-Waste recycling shop run by CORSO. 
:    Since 2005, I have shared research on neighbourhood-scale, renewable energy systems through the Phlogiston group, hosted by RiseUp.net.

:   I was a general volunteer at three hui organised by Permaculture in NZ (PiNZ), in Te Teko in 2008, in Whaingaroa (Raglan) in 2009, and in Motueka in 2010.
:  I founded Aotearoa Permaculture Network (originally set up as 'Permaculture in Aotearoa' in 2009), as a project on CoActivate.org, to provide email lists and wiki spaces to groups working on permaculture projects and issues, to help connect people with related interests, with others in their local area.
:   In 2012 I was on the crew for the APC11 (11th Australasian Permaculture Convergence), where I presented  'A Growing Commons', a proposal for helping permaculture designers develop shared teaching resources, and bioregional knowledge-bases, licensed under CreativeCommons, or open data licenses. 
:   At the PiNZ AGM, held during APC11, I joined the PiNZ Council, and in June 2012 we launched a collaborative design process for a major upgrade of Permaculture.org.nz, beginning with adopting CC-BY-SA as the default license for the site's contents.
:   In 2013 I continued to serve on the PiNZ Council, as Cultural Officer, and Website Liaison. I volunteered as a technical support person for the PiNZ Hui in Taranaki.
:   In 2014, I spent six months as a tenant of the High Street CoHousing Project who are developing on the site of the former High St Primary School in Ōtepoti (Dunedin). I helped with on-site security, decluttering and setting up effective waste management systems, and advising the group on the kind of invisibles structures they could use to address the needs of owners, tenants, and other users of their common facilities.
:   In 2015-16 I facilitated the creation of a Web Team Coordinator position for the upgrade of permaculture.org.nz, and spent six months serving in this role, recruiting new additions to the web team to ensure that "every element is served by multiple functions", ensuring smooth collaboration between team members, setting up a focus group of site users to get regular input into development ideas from outside the team, and reporting regularly to the Council of Permaculture in NZ.

I also have a keen interest in creative spaces and community events.

:   As a child and teenager I was an enthusiastic participant in music, theatre, improv, comedy, and any other kind of performance. At high school I taught theatresports, and formed and managed a band which competed in the Otago regional finals of the Smokefree Rockquest. 
:   I've been on set-up and clean-up crew for numerous concerts and festivals including The Gathering (Takaka Hill, Te Tai Tapu), Soundsplash (Whaingaroa), Luminate (Takaka Hill), Circulation (Ōtepoti), and KiwiBurn (Mangakino), and focaliser for numerous gatherings of te whānau uenuku, and the world rainbow gathering in Aotearoa in 2009/10. 
:   I was a kitchenhand at Hare Krishna Food For Life in 1997, and at the end of that year, I convinced the devotees to run a food stall at the Gathering, and worked with them providing healthy vegetarian food to festival-goers and raising funds for their Christchurch temple. 
:   1998: I initiated and co-directed ((Psyclone)): 'A Carnival of Locality', a three day, two zone festival in central Ōtautahi (Christchurch) which celebrated local musical talent both live and electronic.
:   1999-2000: I co-managed the Memorial Youth House, an arts community in Kirikiriroa (Hamilton).
:   2003: I was a co-founder and one of the first two live-in caretakers at 128 Community House, a collectively-run social centre which is often used for open mic nights and other creative events. 
:   In 2004, I initiated and co-founded The Commons, a self-funding, collectively-run arts and media activism space in central Kirikiriroa (Hamilton), which hosted StationFM. 
:   2005: I co-founded Hairy Fairy Productions, a fire performance troupe based in Kirikiriroa (Hamilton).
:   I was involved in the NZ International Film Festival in Te Whanganui-a-Tara from 2007-09 as an usher, in 2011 as a box office cashier, and in Ōtepoti in 2012 as an usher.
:   2010-11: I was a live-in community facilitator at the South Karori creative community, where I co-managed five large seasonal celebrations for spring and autumn equinox, and a number of smaller ones for summer and winter solstices.
:   2012-13: I Co-Directed the Circulation Festival, a fire arts and circus skills festival held at Waiora Scout Camp, near Ōtepoti (Dunedin). I also wrote and registered the constitution for Circulation Community Inc, an incorporated society which will run Circulation from now on.
:   In 2014, I spent a few months as Events Manager for Purple Rain bar and cafe in Ōtepoti/ Dunedin, helping to coordinate the scheduling and promotion of the various events that took place in the venue, and doing outreach to performers and artists in the city about the potential for new events.

Finally, as an activist for human freedoms, community autonomy, and earth defence, I've contributed direction action, networking, research, and publicity work for numerous grassroots campaigns and small NGOs.

:   As a child in Ōtautahi/ Christchurch, I attended a number of marches and rallies for workers rights and social justice causes with my father, a union organiser, and my mother, a home manager, early childhood teacher, and community worker. During my teens, I cultivated a commitment to non-violence, a strong anti-conformist attitude towards corporate consumerism, and a concern for the future of wildlife, indigenous peoples, and the biosphere in general.
:   Moving to Ōtepoti/ Dunedin In 1995, I attended my first protest as an adult, a picket outside McDonalds, condemning their libel case against two London Greenpeace activists.
:   In 1997-8, after returning to Ōtautahi: I was a founding member of the Anarchist Round Table, which participated in a wide range of activities and campaigns, from regular newsletter 'the Fuse' to McLibel solidarity, to the occupation of an arts community threatened with eviction. I was also a founding member of the Beneficiary Action Collective, and supported a number of campaigns and protests against vivisection and factory farming organised by Save Animals From Exploitation, the NZ Anti-Vivisection Society, and a number of grassroots animal rights groups.
:   Also in 1998, I started testing email lists as tools for activist co-education and networking, using the Egroups.com platform (later bought by Yahoo and merged with YahooGroups). The first experiments were:
:       DIYWeb, which highlighted examples of communities self-organising to meet their own local needs
:       No Borders, which focussed on issues affecting migrants, refugees, and prisoners.
:       Anarchynz, an email-based discussion forum for anti-capitalist libertarians from various groups around Aotearoa.
:  1999-2000: in Kirikiriroa, I was involved in GE Free and anti-vivisection protests, the local branch of the Fightback movement for free education and student rights, and the campaign against a super-dump by the Waikato River.  I was the local distributor for anarchist zine Thrall, and NORML News. 
:   In 2000, I joined the Wild Greens occupation of Maungakiekie (One Tree Hill) in protest against the APEC meeting in Tamaki Makaurau, and attended the mass demonstrations focused on this conference.

:   From 2003-05 I travelled the country almost constantly, writing features about the events and the issues behind demonstrations, conferences, hui, and workshops of all kinds for Aotearoa.Indymedia.org, showing people how to use the site to publish their own news, and encouraging them to get involved in the development of independent media collaborations.
:   2006: I supported the Save Happy Valley Coalition campaign against Solid Energy's proposed Cypress Mine in Waimangaroa Valley, near Westport, spending time at the occupation of public land in the valley, and writing an ecological case study on the area.
:   2007: After the Operation 8 raids on Tuhoe and environmental activists, I spent a month collecting information on the raids and the arrestees, publishing articles on Aotearoa.Indymedia.org, and networking with other solidarity activists, including Ngāi Tūhoe activists.

:   2007: I became the Communications Officer for NORML NZ Inc, providing media and campaign advice to the Board. 
:   In early 2008, I spent three weeks touring Te Ika a Maui with MaryJane the CannaBus, a campaigning vehicle owned by NORML, and operated by Dakta Green (founder of The Daktory). Over that year and the next three, I provided publicity and logistical support for a number of tours and events associated with CannaBus, including the Armistice Tour occupation of parliament grounds.
:   Later 2008: After resigning my position with NORML, I ran in the general election as the Aotearoa Legalise Cannabis Party candidate for Ohariu.
:   In 2011 I was a general assembly facilitator, communications, and media team member, in the Occupy Aotearoa movement. I was in the first group to put up tents at Civic Square in Te Whanganui-a-Tara. I also spent some time supporting the occupations in Hagley Park (Ōtautahi), and the Octagon (Ōtepoti). 
:   In 2013, I was elected to the Board of the Pirate Party of New Zealand as Communications Manager, and facilitated the creation of a consensus decision-making platform for the party, using Loomio. After announcing my resignation, due to my plan to stay off the internet for a year and write 'Email Ate My Life', I created and took up the position of Orientation Officer, whose role was to connect with new members by phone and in-person meetings and help them understand how to get active in the party.
:   In 2016, I did a regularly hospitality shift at WhakaMana, the Ōtepoti (Dunedin) drug law reform headquarters and social club, and the only Cannabis Museum in Aotearoa.

Tēnā rā koutou katoa

Daniel Strypy Bruce


"I would rather be exposed to the inconveniences attending too much liberty  than to those attending too small a degree of it."
- Thomas Jefferson

"But libertarians do not defend the right of people to smash holes in the hull of a crowded ship, or to let off bombs in city centres. Freedom does not include the freedom to trash the habitat we all depend on for survival."
- Johann Hari, 'The Independent'