'''* Book: A Study of History. Arnold Toynbee.'''

URL = https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Study_of_History

=Description=

"“English historian whose 12-volume A Study of History (1934–61) put forward a philosophy of history, based on an analysis of the cyclical development and decline of civilizations, that provoked much discussion.” [https://www.britannica.com/biography/Arnold-Joseph-Toynbee]

'''1. From the Wikipedia:'''

"A Study of History is a 12-volume universal history by the British historian Arnold J. Toynbee, published from 1934 to 1961. It received enormous popular attention but according to historian Richard J. Evans, "enjoyed only a brief vogue before disappearing into the obscurity in which it has languished."[1] Toynbee's goal was to trace the development and decay of 19 or 21 world civilizations in the historical record, applying his model to each of these civilizations, detailing the stages through which they all pass: genesis, growth, time of troubles, universal state, and disintegration.

The 19 (or 21) major civilizations, as Toynbee sees them, are: Egyptian, Andean, Sumerian, Babylonic, Hittite, Minoan, Indic, Hindu, Syriac[disambiguation needed], Hellenic, Western, Orthodox Christian (having two branches: the main or Byzantine body and the Russian branch), Far Eastern (having two branches: the main or Chinese-Korean body and the Japanese branch), Persian, Arabic, Hindu, Mayan, Mexican and Yucatec. Moreover, there are three "abortive civilizations" (Abortive Far Western Christian, Abortive Far Eastern Christian, Abortive Scandinavian) and five "arrested civilizations" (Polynesian, Eskimo, Nomadic, Ottoman, Spartan), for a total of 27 or 29."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Study_of_History)


'''2. From Encyclopedia.com:'''

"Arnold Toynbee's multi-volume A Study of History is one of the major works of historical scholarship published in the twentieth century. The first volume was published in London in 1934, and subsequent volumes appeared periodically until the twelfth and final volume was published in London in 1961. A two-volume abridgement of volumes 1-10 was prepared by D. C. Somervell with Toynbee's cooperation and published in 1947 (volume one) and 1957 (volume two) in London.

A Study of History in its original form is a huge work. The first ten volumes contain over six thousand pages and more than three million words. Somervell's abridgement, containing only about one-sixth of the original, runs to over nine hundred pages. The size of the work is in proportion to the grandeur of Toynbee's purpose, which is to analyze the genesis, growth, and fall of every human civilization ever known. In Toynbee's analysis, this amounts to five living civilizations and sixteen extinct ones, as well as several that Toynbee defines as arrested civilizations.

Toynbee detects in the rise and fall of civilizations a recurring pattern, and it is the laws of history behind this pattern that he analyzes in A Study of History.

From the outset, A Study of History was a controversial work. It won wide readership amongst the general public, especially in the United States, and after World War II Toynbee was hailed as a prophet of his times. On the other hand, his work was viewed with skepticism by academic historians, many of whom argued that his methods were unscientific and his conclusions unreliable or simply untrue. Despite these criticisms, however, A Study of History endures as a provocative vision of where humanity has been, and why, and where it may be headed."

(https://www.encyclopedia.com/arts/culture-magazines/study-history)


==Status==

Daniel A. Dombrowski:

"His magnum opus, A Study of  History, is a twelve-volume work where his processual view of civilizational rise and fall is developed in detail.  The first six volumes appeared between 1927 and 1939, the last  of  which  appeared  just  before  the  start  of  World  War  Two  in  Europe.    Volumes  seven  through  ten  appeared  in  1954,  with  volume  eleven  (a  historical  atlas)  in  1959  and  volume  twelve  (containing  reconsiderations  regarding  the  previous  eleven  volumes)  in  1961.    An  illustrated  one  volume summary  of  the  entire work appeared in 1972."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/966/1627)

=Contents=

From the Wikipedia:

Publication of A Study of History

#Vol I: Introduction: The Geneses of Civilizations, part one (Oxford University Press, 1934)
#Vol II: The Geneses of Civilizations, part two (Oxford University Press, 1934)
#Vol III: The Growths of Civilizations (Oxford University Press, 1934)
#Vol IV: The Breakdowns of Civilizations (Oxford University Press, 1939)
#Vol V: The Disintegrations of Civilizations, part one (Oxford University Press, 1939)
#Vol VI: The Disintegrations of Civilizations, part two (Oxford University Press, 1939)
#Vol VII: Universal States; Universal Churches (Oxford University Press, 1954) [as two volumes in paperback]
#Vol VIII: Heroic Ages; Contacts between Civilizations in Space (Encounters between Contemporaries) (Oxford University Press, 1954)
#Vol IX: Contacts between Civilizations in Time (Renaissances); Law and Freedom in History; The Prospects of the Western Civilization (Oxford University Press, 1954)
#Vol X: The Inspirations of Historians; A Note on Chronology (Oxford University Press, 1954)
#Vol XI: Historical Atlas and Gazetteer (Oxford University Press, 1959)
#Vol XII: Reconsiderations (Oxford University Press, 1961)

* ''Abridgements by D. C. Somervell'':
**A Study of History: Abridgement of Vols I–VI, with a preface by Toynbee (Oxford University Press, 1946)[4]
**A Study of History: Abridgement of Vols VII–X (Oxford University Press, 1957)

'''* A Study of History: Abridgement of Vols I–X in One Volume, with new preface by Toynbee & new tables (Oxford Univ. Press, 1960)'''

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Study_of_History)


==Content Summary==

Via Encyclopedia.com:

===Chapter 1: The Unit of Historical Study===

In A Study of History, Toynbee first identifies the unit that should be the object of the historian's study. This unit is not an individual nation but an entire civilization. Toynbee identifies five living civilizations: Western Christian, Orthodox Christian, Islamic, Hindu, and Far Eastern. In addition there are sixteen extinct civilizations from which living civilizations developed. Toynbee then makes a distinction between primitive societies, of which there are many, and civilizations, which are comparatively few. He dismisses the idea that there is now only one civilization, the West, and also the notion that all civilization originated in Egypt.


===Chapter 2: Geneses of Civilizations===

How do civilizations emerge from primitive societies? For Toynbee, the answer does not lie in race; nor does an easy environment provide a key to the origins of civilization. On the contrary, civilizations arise out of creative responses to difficult situations. It is difficulty, rather than ease, that proves the stimulus. Toynbee identifies five challenges that aid the process: a hard environment; a new environment; one or more "blows," such as a military defeat; pressures, such as a frontier society subjected to frequent attack; and penalizations, such as slavery or other measures in which one class or race is oppressed by another. Some challenges, however, prove to be too severe and do not result in a civilization's growth.


===Chapter 3: Growths of Civilizations===

After examining why some civilizations (Polynesian, Eskimo) cease to develop, Toynbee discusses how the growth of a society is to be measured. He concludes that neither military nor political expansion, nor advances in agricultural or industrial techniques, are reliable criteria. These are external indicators, whereas what is important is "etherialization." In this process, the energies of a society are directed away from external material obstacles, which have been overcome, towards challenges that arise from within and require an inner or spiritual response. Growth happens because of creative individuals who exhibit a pattern of withdrawal from and return to society.


===Chapter 4: Breakdowns of Civilizations===

The breakdown of a civilization, Toynbee holds, is not due to some inevitable cosmic law. Nor is it caused by loss of control over the physical or human environment, a decline in technology, or military aggression. A breakdown happens when the creative minority loses its creative power and the majority no longer follows it, or follows it only because it is compelled to do so. This results in a loss of social unity and the emergence of a disaffected "proletariat." Creative minorities lose their power because they have a habit of "resting on their oars" following their success and becoming infatuated with the past. Therefore they fail to meet the next challenge successfully.


===Chapter 5: Disintegration of Civilizations===

When a civilization disintegrates, it splits into three factions: a "dominant minority," which is a degenerate stage of a formerly creative minority; an "internal proletariat," which is a mass of people within the civilization who no longer have any allegiance to the dominant minority and may rebel against it; and an "external proletariat" that exists beyond the frontiers of the civilization and resists being incorporated into it. An internal proletariat may react violently against the dominant minority, but later there may be a more peaceful reaction, culminating in the discovery of a "higher religion."

Social changes in a disintegrating civilization are accompanied by changes in behavior, beliefs, and ways of life. There is either a sense of "drift," in which people believe the world is ruled by chance, or a sense of sin, both of which are substitutes for the creative energy that has been lost. There may also be "archaism," a desire to return to the past, or "futurism," a revolutionary mode in which old institutions are scrapped. Disintegration of a civilization proceeds in a rhythm of "routs" followed by "rallies." During this process, creative personalities will emerge as different kinds of "saviours."


===Chapter 6: Universal States===

A universal state appears as part of the "rally" stage in the disintegration of a civilization; it follows a "Time of Troubles" and brings political unity. However, it is still part of the process of disintegration. Although universal states fail to save themselves, they do offer unintended advantages to other institutions, such as the higher religions of their internal proletariats. Universal states provide high "conductivity" between different geographic areas and between social classes. They are often ruled with tolerance, which helps to facilitate the spread of higher religions. Many of the institutions established by a universal state, such as communications, legal systems, weights and measures, money, and civil services, are made use of by communities other than those for which they were designed.


===Chapter 7: Universal Churches===

Toynbee analyzes the relationship between churches and civilizations. He repudiates the idea that a church is like a social cancer that leads to the decline of the universal state. But the idea that churches act as chrysalises, keeping civilization alive as it evolves from one manifestation into the next, is not the entire truth either, he writes. Toynbee argues that, rather than religion being a by-product of civilization, the whole purpose of a civilization is to provide an opportunity for one of the higher religions (Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam) to emerge.


===Chapter 8: Heroic Ages===

When a disintegrating civilization is destroyed by barbarians who have previously co-existed alongside it, the result is a Heroic Age. The barbarians are not sufficiently advanced to benefit from the legacy of the civilization they have destroyed although they may commemorate their victories in epic poetry. A Heroic Age is an interlude between the death of one civilization and the birth of another. It leads to a Dark Age, out of which civilization reemerges.


===Chapter 9: Contacts between Civilizations in Space===

When diverse civilizations come into contact with each other, there is usually conflict, with disastrous results. A civilization under assault may fight back by military means; with ideological propaganda (as the Soviet Union did against the West); by intensely cultivating its own religion; or by creating a higher religion. A victorious civilization will sometimes become militarized, to its own ultimate cost. It also pays the price of having the culture of the alien civilization seep into its own social life, which may have adverse consequences. A civilization that subjugates another may make the mistake of regarding the conquered people as "heathens," "barbarians," or "natives."

===Chapter 10: Contacts between Civilizations in Time===

Toynbee surveys the many renaissances in history in which one civilization has drawn new inspiration from a civilization of the past. The best-known example is the influence of the dead Hellenic civilization on Western Christendom in the late medieval period (the Italian Renaissance).


===Chapter 11: Law and Freedom in History===

Does history unfold according to laws of nature or is the process random? Toynbee argues for the former. He cites examples from human affairs such as business and economics that show the operation of predictable laws. Then he points to a cyclic pattern of war and peace in modern Western history and notes that disintegrating civilizations follow a similar pattern of rout-and-rally. Humankind can harness these laws of nature to its benefit although the extent to which it is able to do so depends on its own psychology and on its relationship with God, who represents a higher law than the law of nature.


===Chapter 12: Prospects of Western Civilization===

Worship of the nation-state and militarism are negative aspects of modern Western civilization, Toynbee holds, but it has also achieved positive results in promoting democracy and education. Toynbee discusses prospects for world peace, world government, and issues arising from modern technology. The price a society pays for freedom from want is increasing regimentation, which encroaches on personal freedom. Toynbee holds out the hope that in a mechanized society in which there is more leisure, people will have more energy to devote to spiritual matters."

(https://www.encyclopedia.com/arts/culture-magazines/study-history)

=Discussion=

==The Civilizational Cycle==

From the Wikipedia:

===Genesis and Growth===

"Toynbee argues that civilizations are born out of more primitive societies, not as the result of racial or environmental factors, but as a response to challenges, such as hard country, new ground, blows and pressures from other civilizations, and penalization. He argues that for civilizations to be born, the challenge must be a golden mean; that excessive challenge will crush the civilization, and too little challenge will cause it to stagnate. He argues that civilizations continue to grow only when they meet one challenge only to be met by another, in a continuous cycle of "Challenge and Response". He argues that civilizations develop in different ways due to their different environments and different approaches to the challenges they face. He argues that growth is driven by "Creative Minorities": those who find solutions to the challenges, who inspire (rather than compel) others to follow their innovative lead. This is done through the "faculty of mimesis." Creative minorities find solutions to the challenges a civilization faces, while the great mass follow these solutions by imitation, solutions they otherwise would be incapable of discovering on their own.

In 1939, Toynbee wrote,

"The challenge of being called upon to create a political world-order, the framework for an economic world-order … now confronts our Modern Western society."


===Breakdown and Disintegration===

Toynbee does not see the breakdown of civilizations as caused by loss of control over the physical environment, by loss of control over the human environment, or by attacks from outside. Rather, it comes from the deterioration of the "Creative Minority", which eventually ceases to be creative and degenerates into merely a "Dominant Minority".

He argues that creative minorities deteriorate due to a worship of their "former self," by which they become prideful and fail adequately to address the next challenge they face.


===Results of the breakdown===

The final breakdown results in "positive acts of creation;" the dominant minority seeks to create a Universal state to preserve its power and influence, and the internal proletariat seeks to create a Universal church to preserve its spiritual values and cultural norms.


====Universal state====

He argues that the ultimate sign a civilization has broken down is when the dominant minority forms a "universal state", which stifles political creativity within the existing social order. The classic example of this is the Roman Empire, though many other imperial regimes are cited as examples. Toynbee writes:

"First the Dominant Minority attempts to hold by force—against all right and reason—a position of inherited privilege which it has ceased to merit; and then the Proletariat repays injustice with resentment, fear with hate, and violence with violence when it executes its acts of secession. Yet the whole movement ends in positive acts of creation—and this on the part of all the actors in the tragedy of disintegration. The Dominant Minority creates a universal state, the Internal Proletariat a universal church, and the External Proletariat a bevy of barbarian war-bands."


====Universal church====

Toynbee developed his concept of an "internal proletariat" and an "external proletariat" to describe quite different opposition groups within and outside the frontiers of a civilization. These groups, however, find themselves bound to the fate of the civilization.[5] During its decline and disintegration, they are increasingly disenfranchised or alienated, and thus lose their immediate sense of loyalty or of obligation. Nonetheless an "internal proletariat," untrusting of the dominant minority, may form a "universal church" which survives the civilization's demise, co-opting the useful structures such as marriage laws of the earlier time while creating a new philosophical or religious pattern for the next stage of history.

Before the process of disintegration, the dominant minority had held the internal proletariat in subjugation within the confines of the civilization, causing these oppressed to grow bitter. The external proletariat, living outside the civilization in poverty and chaos, grows envious. Then, in the social stress resulting from the failure of the civilization, the bitterness and envy increase markedly.

Toynbee argues that as civilizations decay, there is a "schism" within the society. In this environment of discord, people resort to archaism (idealization of the past), futurism (idealization of the future), detachment (removal of oneself from the realities of a decaying world), and transcendence (meeting the challenges of the decaying civilization with new insight, e.g., by following a new religion). From among members of an "internal proletariat" who transcend the social decay a "church" may arise. Such an association would contain new and stronger spiritual insights, around which a subsequent civilization may begin to form. Toynbee here uses the word "church" in a general sense, e.g., to refer to a collective spiritual bond found in common worship, or the unity found in an agreed social order."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Study_of_History)


=Discussion 2=

==Evaluating its impact==

By Krishan Kumar:

"TOYNBEE AND CIVILIZATION

It was in this climate that Oswald Spengler's The Decline of the West (1991 [1918–1922]) appeared, which goes a long way toward explaining its enormous impact and popularity in the immediate postwar period (Hughes 1952: 89–97). Spengler accepted the multiplicity of civilizations, and also that Western civilization had been among the most creative. But now he saw Western civilization in its death-throes, following the cycle of birth, rise, and decline that he discerned in all civilizations. Using the German terms that had been established by Kant, Herder, and others in the late eighteenth century (Elias 1994: 3–28), Spengler distinguished between the creative Kultur of a society, and its hardening and descent into mere Zivilisation. But he gave the distinction his own special twist by employing them to indicate successive phases of social evolution. “The Civilization is the inevitable destiny of the Culture, and in this principle we obtain the viewpoint from which the deepest and gravest problems of historical morphology become capable of solution. Civilizations are the most external and artificial states of which a species of developed humanity is capable.… They are an end, irrevocable, yet by inward necessity reached again and again” (1991: 24). We have it in Arnold Toynbee's own words that the appearance of Spengler's book almost stopped him in his tracks, as apparently answering a question that he had been pondering for many years. What had led a few societies in humanity's whole history to transcend the level of “primitive human life” to embark upon “the enterprise called civilization? What had roused them from a torpor that the great majority of human societies had never shaken off? This question was simmering in my mind when, in the summer of 1920, Professor [Lewis] Namier … placed in my hands Oswald Spengler's Untergang des Abendlandes. As I read those pages teeming with firefly flashes of historical insight, I wondered at first whether my whole inquiry had been disposed of by Spengler before even the questions, not to speak of the answers, had fully taken shape in my own mind” (Toynbee 1948: 9).

Toynbee was perhaps relieved—as any scholar might be—to discover on closer examination of Spengler's book that it did not really answer the question of the geneses of civilizations at all, adopting instead “a most unilluminatingly dogmatic and deterministic” approach, according to which “civilizations arose, developed, declined, and foundered in unvarying conformity with a fixed time-table, and no explanation was offered for any of this” (ibid.: 10). Moreover, though there are interesting correspondences between Spengler's and Toynbee's works, and though Toynbee quotes Spengler many times, it is clear that Toynbee had arrived at his basic conception of civilizations, and of their dynamics, before he read The Decline of the West. This had a lot to do with Toynbee's training as a classicist, because it was fundamentally from classical literature and classical history, the literature and history of what he called Hellenism, that Toynbee drew his inspiration for his understanding of the pattern of all civilizations.

Already in May 1920, before he knew of Spengler's work, Toynbee in a lecture to Oxford students, entitled “The Tragedy of Greece,” had sketched out some of the main ideas that were to govern his great Study in subsequent decades. He declared, “civilization is a work of art,” and that an understanding of it can be derived as much from literary and artistic sources as from more conventional historical ones. Toynbee then proceeded to argue that the study of the history of Greek civilization has particular advantages over that of others, especially the modern West, because “in Greek history the plot of civilization has been worked out to its conclusion” (1921: 5, 10). The history of Hellenism—the history of Graeco-Roman civilization—had to be seen, he said, as a unified one: “The first emergence of the Greek city-state in the Aegean and the last traces of municipal self-government in the Roman empire are phases in the history of a single civilization.… You cannot really draw a distinction between Greek history and Roman history.… The Roman Empire was essentially a Greek institution … the pulse of the Empire was driven by a Greek heart” (ibid.: 17–18, 20).

Thus seen, Greek history had to be considered a “tragedy” in three acts, each producing its characteristic mood and expression, and each contributing to the tragic denouement, the decline and fall of Greek civilization. Toynbee was particularly concerned with the third and final act because it was in considering its course that he hit upon the idea that civilizations do not merely die, but rather in the process of their dying they throw up their successors. The Roman Empire, which was “the decline and fall of Greek civilization,” the third act in the Greek tragedy, was highly oppressive of the Roman proletariat, but in such a way as to give rise to “a rival civilization of the proletariat—the Christian Church” (ibid.: 35, 37). “Thus the empire of which Marcus [Aurelius] and Paul [of Tarsus] were citizens was more than the third act in the tragedy of Ancient Greece. While it retarded the inevitable dissolution of one civilization it conceived its successor.… By the seventh century after Christ, when Ancient Greek civilization may be said finally to have dissolved, our own civilization was ready to ‘shoot up and thrive’ and repeat the tragedy of mankind” (ibid.: 41).

Certainly at least up to the appearance of volume six of the Study, in 1939, this classical conception seems to have undergirded the structure of the whole massive enterprise. While all the relevant terms are not in the 1920 lecture, it is clear that Toynbee had by then convinced himself that in the vicissitudes of Graeco-Roman civilization he could discern the “tragic” course of all civilizations. “Hellenic Society” (or Civilization18) had the further advantage of showing unambiguously something else that came to loom large in the Study: the way civilizations are often “apparented” and “affiliated” to each other—how one civilization might derive from an earlier one while in turn giving rise to a later one. Thus Hellenic Society is seen as affiliated to an earlier Minoan-Mycenean Society, while subsequently being “apparented” to later Western Society. Hellenism demonstrated for Toynbee, in a highly satisfactory way, both the distinctiveness and the connections between civilizations. It was this that enabled him to distance himself further from Spengler, with the latter's much stronger insistence on the separation of civilizations.

It is easy to see, when observed on the larger canvas of the Study, the way in which Toynbee converted the local and particular phases of Hellenic civilization into the key terms for his analysis of civilization tout court. Civilizations, he argues, begin with a heroic and hard-won response to a challenge from the environment, at first the physical environment but then increasingly a social and political one. This response, carried out by “creative minorities,” hardens over time to rule by less adaptable and less creative “dominant minorities” (see Spengler on the move from Kultur to Zivilisation). This in turn generally leads to a “Time of Troubles,” in which the different states composing the civilization war with each other, leading to a peace of exhaustion in the creation of a “Universal State.” Meanwhile, large sections of the population withdraw into the status of an “internal proletariat,” while outside the frontiers of the civilization an “external proletariat” of “barbarians” threatens. The internal proletariat throws up a “Universal Church” that offers hope and the promise of salvation. The Universal Church then becomes the chrysalis of a new civilization that is thereby “affiliated” to the old.19

Hellenic civilization, in Toynbee's understanding of it, had gone through precisely this course. Thus an original, creative response in the Greek city-states is consolidated by Alexander in his empire (at the cost of the independence of the city-states). The break-up of Alexander's empire leads in turn to a “Time of Troubles” in which warfare convulses the Hellenic world. Eventually Rome emerges as the dominant force, with a “dominant minority” that creates a “Universal State” in the Roman Empire. At the same time an “internal proletariat,” made up of peoples from all parts of the empire, emerges, to develop the “Universal Church” of Christianity. On the borders of the empire are the barbarian tribes, the “external proletariat,” which eventually break through only to be absorbed by the emerging new civilization of Western Christendom. The Roman Empire is also “apparented” to a second new civilization, that of Orthodox Christianity, which rises with the Byzantine Empire and is continued within the body of the Ottoman Empire and elsewhere, such as Russia (1962–1964: I, 52–63).20

Such was the conception that underlay Toynbee's vast undertaking, the labor of a lifetime. Over a period of forty years—the work as a whole was first conceived, he tells us, in 1921—he produced a succession of volumes amounting in the end to the twelve volumes of A Study of History. Volumes I–III appeared in 1934, IV–VI in 1939, and VII–X—interrupted by war work—in 1954. A Historical Atlas and Gazetter, published as XI, appeared in 1959, followed finally by a volume of Reconsiderations, published as XII in 1961. Oxford University Press from 1962 into 1964 published a paperback edition of all twelve volumes (conveniently, pagination was the same as for the hardback edition).

A Study of History is, by any measure, a stupendous achievement. There is really nothing comparable to it in any other language or society. Even its severest critics, such as Pieter Geyl, remark on its “miraculous learning,” the “wealth of its examples,” “its splendid, full and supple style.” They commend it for the range of disciplines it draws upon—anthropology, sociology, psychology, philosophy, theology, biology, and literature. For all his criticisms, says Geyl, “I shall ever remain grateful to the author for profound remarks, striking parallels, wide prospects, and other concomitant beauties” (1955: 91, 97). William McNeill, Toynbee's more sympathetic biographer, writes, “After more than half a century reading Toynbee's pages still remains an adventure. The dazzling range of his information, the boldness of his comparisons, the perspicacity of his reflections … all combine to make his volumes worth anyone's attention” (1989: 165).

These observations are important, since they point toward the possibility that, even if readers were to be unconvinced by the overall framework of Toynbee's Study, they might still find much to admire and learn from it. It is all the more regrettable then, that, discouraged by the dismissal of Toynbee by most professional historians, few people read him today. They therefore do not discover for themselves the “firefly flashes of historical insight”—what Toynbee found of value in Spengler—that are to be found scattered throughout the twelve volumes, and which make them worth the attention of anyone, however unfashionable Toynbee's general approach has become. Toynbee can be read for the parts as well as the whole; it is possible that the parts are indeed better—more instructive, more interesting—than the whole.

It is beyond the scope of this paper to attempt an assessment of the general features of Toynbee's analysis of civilizations. It is probably here that Toynbee has come in for the most severe criticism.21 Critics have not been persuaded by the model of “challenge and response” as the source of civilizational genesis and growth. They have accepted that Toynbee differs from Spengler in not working with the analogy between the individual and the social organism, each with their cycles of birth, youth, maturity, and decline into old age. But they see similar weaknesses in the common pattern that Toynbee discerns of growth and decline through the sequence of a creative minority becoming a dominant minority, a Time of Troubles leading to a Universal State and a Universal Church, and the emergence of a new civilization on the basis of the Universal Church created by the internal proletariat. For many critics, while some of the concepts work for the particular pattern of Hellenic Society, they are highly unconvincing when transposed across all twenty-one civilizations.

I share some of these concerns. Toynbee's overall framework can often seem Procrustean; the intricate relationships of “apparentation-and-affiliation” between civilizations often seem too ingenious to be convincing; the fondness for analogies and metaphors drawn from the mechanical, physical, and life sciences often seems to lead to fanciful comparisons. Moreover, civilizational analysis, especially of the comparative kind, is always going to be problematic, given enduring disagreements about definitions and units of analysis. Thus Toynbee's listing of twenty-one civilizations might seem highly questionable; many of his critics have come up with very different lists, equally convincing (or not).

But to say this is not to dismiss Toynbee—far from it. A Study of History is far more than a schematic account of civilizational rise and fall in the manner of earlier “conjectural histories” or evolutionary “philosophies of history.” It is far more, in other words, than the sum of its parts. Its strength lies precisely in “the parts”—in the examination of particular civilizations, in tracing the links between them, in providing illuminating insights into all manner of historical questions that have preoccupied historians and others for a long time. None of this, probably, would have been possible, for Toynbee at least, if he had not approached his study from a lofty and philosophical height. But whatever our feelings about the project as a whole, it is open to us to find in this vast study many particular gems, discussions of particular issues that throw light on subjects of major importance. Toynbee had an encyclopedic knowledge and a penetrating mind. His way of thinking about history provides him with a vantage point from which to look at some familiar questions in a quite unfamiliar way."

(https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/comparative-studies-in-society-and-history/article/return-of-civilizationand-of-arnold-toynbee/FE6F858900CBB1843DD7C0D3DD5BE360)


==Toynbee’s theory of decay==

From the Wikipedia:

"In his acclaimed 12-volume work, A Study of History (1934–1961), the British historian Arnold J. Toynbee explored the rise and fall of 28 civilizations and came to the conclusion that civilizations generally collapsed mainly by internal factors, factors of their own making, but external pressures also played a role.[1] He theorized that all civilizations pass through several distinct stages: genesis, growth, time of troubles, universal state, and disintegration.

For Toynbee, a civilization is born when a "creative minority" successfully responds to the challenges posed by its physical, social, and political environment. However, the fixation on the old methods of the "creative minority" leads it to eventually cease to be creative and degenerate into merely a "dominant minority" (that forces the majority to obey without meriting obedience), which fails to recognize new ways of thinking. He argues that creative minorities deteriorate from a worship of their "former self", by which they become prideful, and they fail in adequately addressing the next challenge that they face. Similarly, the German philosopher Oswald Spengler discussed the transition from Kultur to Zivilisation in his The Decline of the West (1918).

Toynbee argues that the ultimate sign a civilization has broken down is when the dominant minority forms a Universal State, which stifles political creativity. He states:

First the Dominant Minority attempts to hold by force - against all right and reason - a position of inherited privilege which it has ceased to merit; and then the Proletariat repays injustice with resentment, fear with hate, and violence with violence when it executes its acts of secession. Yet the whole movement ends in positive acts of creation - and this on the part of all the actors in the tragedy of disintegration. The Dominant Minority creates a universal state, the Internal Proletariat a universal church, and the External Proletariat a bevy of barbarian war-bands.

He argues that as civilizations decay, they form an "Internal Proletariat" and an "External Proletariat." The Internal proletariat is held in subjugation by the dominant minority inside the civilization, and grows bitter; the external proletariat exists outside the civilization in poverty and chaos and grows envious. He argues that as civilizations decay, there is a "schism in the body social", whereby abandon and self-control together replace creativity, and truancy and martyrdom together replace discipleship by the creative minority.

He argues that in that environment, people resort to archaism (idealization of the past), futurism (idealization of the future), detachment (removal of oneself from the realities of a decaying world), and transcendence (meeting the challenges of the decaying civilization with new insight, as a prophet). He argues that those who transcend during a period of social decay give birth to a new Church with new and stronger spiritual insights around which a subsequent civilization may begin to form after the old has died. Toynbee's use of the word 'church' refers to the collective spiritual bond of a common worship, or the same unity found in some kind of social order.

The historian Carroll Quigley expanded upon that theory in The Evolution of Civilizations (1961, 1979). He argued that societal disintegration involves the metamorphosis of social instruments, which were set up to meet actual needs, into institutions, which serve their own interest at the expense of social needs.[96] However, in the 1950s, Toynbee's approach to history, his style of civilizational analysis, started to face skepticism from mainstream historians who thought it put an undue emphasis on the divine, which led to his academic reputation declining. For a time, however, Toynbee's Study remained popular outside academia. Interest revived decades later with the publication of The Clash of Civilizations (1997) by the political scientist Samuel P. Huntington, who viewed human history as broadly the history of civilizations and posited that the world after the end of the Cold War will be multipolar and one of competing major civilizations, which are divided by "fault lines."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Societal_collapse)


==A Processual View of  Civilizations==

DANIEL A. DOMBROWSKI:

"In one sense, history is clearly relative to the perspective of the historian, as Toynbee readily admits.  But in another sense, there are good reasons to reject or at least to criticize some historical perspectives, say those that foster the industrialization of historical thinking.  Like Whitehead (especially  in  Adventures  of   Ideas),  Toynbee  thinks  it  is  disastrous  when  human  beings  (and  nonhuman  animals)  are  seen  as  mere  sticks  and  stones.    Granted,  there  are  problems  with  the  pathetic  fallacy,  wherein  inanimate  objects  are  described  as  having  feelings.    However,  there  are  also  problems  with  what  Toynbee  (and  Hartshorne  2011,  40-41)  calls  “the  apathetic  fallacy,”  wherein  clearly  sentient  beings  are  seen  as  mere  lifeless  cogs  or  pawns  in  the  historical  drama.    Industrialism,  nationalism,  communism,  and  other  “isms”  that  have  motivated some historians have encouraged this latter fallacy (30-38). It  should  be  noted  that  the  intelligible  field  of  study  that  Toynbee  (and  Whitehead)  have  in  mind  is  not  the  individual  nation  or  state,  in  supposed  isolation from other nations or states, but nations or states in relation with each other as parts of a civilization, say Western civilization as opposed to England or France or the United States individually.  Civilizations (or societies, as Toynbee sometimes  labels  them)  involve  a  vast  network  of  relations,  as  opposed  to  the  atomization  of  either  an  individual,  on  the  one  hand,  or  a  nation-state,  on  the  other.    As  in  Whitehead  (and  Plato),  the  real  is  dipolar  in  the  sense  that  each  instance  of  it  has  both  an  “in  itself ”  character  as  well  as  an  “in  relation  with  others”  character  and  it  is  primarily  the  latter  that  makes  historical  reality  intelligible (39-43; also see Dombrowski forthcoming).A  crucial  point  of  convergence  between  Toynbee  and  Whitehead  occurs  when the former explicitly cites the latter in rejection of the idea that the rise and flourishing  of  civilizations  is  primarily  due  to  increases  in  food  production  and  advances  in  technology.    Rather,  civilizations  rise  and  flourish  due  to  “some  profound cosmological outlook,” as Whitehead puts the point and as endorsed by Toynbee.  Behind every great civilization there is a vision (44; also see Whitehead 1967, 13-14; Frankfort 1951, 57-58).  


As Toynbee suggests:

''- "Following Whitehead’s lead, I would define civilization in spiritual terms.  Perhaps it might be defined as an endeavor to create a state of society in which the whole of Mankind [sic] will be able to live together in harmony, as members of a single all-inclusive family.  This is, I believe, the goal of which all civilizations so far known have been aiming unconsciously, if not consciously".''

In addition to the practical benefit that might result from understanding the rise, flourishing, and decline of civilizations, there is also the intrinsic value found in the acquisition of such knowledge.  Toynbee is primarily motivated by curiosity or Aristotelian wonder.  In response to the aforementioned contemporary threats to Western    civilization    (the    threat    of    authoritarianism,    threats    from    microorganisms, and the threat of ecological disaster), I have frequently of late found myself wondering: Why have these threats occurred?  To what extent were they preventable?  Toynbee’s point would seem to be that such questions require a comparative  study  of  civilizations  such  as  that  developed  in  his  own  A  Study  of   History.    A  civilization  is  not  only  larger  than  a  nation-state,  it  is  also  more  intelligible  in  the  sense  that  it  is  nearer  to  the  standard  of  being  self-contained, although not even individual civilizations are strictly self-contained  in  that  they  are not fully intelligible apart from relations with other civilizations (46-47).The  comparative  study  of  civilizations  includes  a  consideration  of  previous  civilizations out of which contemporary ones develop, as in Western civilization arising  out  of  the  compost  of  the  previous  Greco-Roman  civilization  as  well  as  the  Syriac  civilization  that  contained  the  biblical  people.    There  is  a  sharp  contrast  between  the  strong  cultural  (including  religious)  unity  of  the  Greco-Roman  civilization  and  its  political  disunity  for  much  of  its  history  before  Alexander the Great.  This is quite different from the politically liberal world in which we  live,  which  is  characterized  by  pervasive  cultural-religious  pluralism,  but relative stability in politics, at least at the level of individual states.  That is, the spiritual core of Western civilization must, given the widespread pluralism of religious  beliefs  (or  lack  thereof),  involve  toleration  of  various  religious  beliefs  rather than the imposition of one comprehensive doctrine on many others who do not believe it.

We would be well served to view Toynbee not only as a process thinker,  in  general,  but  also  as  a  process  philosopher  of  religion,  in  particular.    One indication of this was noted above when Toynbee gives evidence of moving away  from  the  traditional  theistic  belief  in  divine  omnipotence,  a  rejection  he  shared  with  Whitehead  and  Hartshorne.    The  obvious  evil  Toynbee  saw  in  history means that God could not be both omnibenevolent and omnipotent and, given  the  forced  choice  between  these  two  divine  attributes,  the  logic  of  perfection requires that we retain the former and reject the latter.  This is due to the primacy of the good that Toynbee realizes can be traced back as far as Plato.  

History looks quite different when there is no all-controlling God hovering over it so as to be responsible for its outcome, including the evils exhibited in it.  That is, belief in divine omnipotence entails that when evil occurs, it is either sent by God or is at least permitted by this omnipotent being.  It is much more intelligible to view God as a final cause or as an ideal lure than as a Grand Puppeteer who pulls  all  the  strings  in  human  history  (162,  169,  244,  349;  also  see  Dombrowski  2006; Hartshorne 1962).    Another similarity between Toynbee and process theists consists in Toynbee’s belief that, although the function of religion is to enable human beings to enter into  a  direct  relationship  with  ultimate  reality,  this  does  not  necessarily  entail  commitment  to  otherworldliness  or  asceticism.    The  ascetic  assumes  that  engagement with historical forces will encourage too much of an attachment to “this” world.  Although we should avoid otherworldliness, it is also important in Toynbee  and  in  all  of  the  world’s  great  religions  to  avoid  egocentrism.    But  egocentrism  comes  in  many  forms,  including  the  orgiastic  cult  of  Dionysus  or  Bacchus in Greco-Roman civilization or in hedonistic versions of capitalism, on the one hand, and the cult of self-denial in several religions, on the other, which, when  carried  to  an  extreme,  is  usually  due  to  a  desire  to  escape  from  a  world  conceived to be intolerable.  This latter approach is as barren and as destructive of civilization as the self-indulgent rites of the ecstatics, Toynbee thinks.  God is to be found in this world through civilization (218-219). Civilizations flourish when there is widespread evidence of people being both seized by the inwardness of the spiritual core of the civilization and willing to actin ways  that  encourage  the  civilization  to  respond  creatively  to  new  challenges.    Toynbee  often  (along  with  Whitehead,  Bergson,  Hartshorne,  and  Teilhard)  castigates   reified   and   fossilized   institutions,   whether   political/economic,   religious, or aesthetic, that halt creative advance (547; also see Bergson 1932, 98-99, 177-178, 251).Finally,  it  is  significant  that  Toynbee  and  the  process  thinkers mentioned in this article were all politically liberal internationalists.  Given the famous global village  in  which  we  now  live  and  given  the  enormity  of  the  environmental  problems that we face (see, e.g, Henning 2015; Gare 2010; Schulz 2020), the only rational  hope  for  us  consists  in  either  the  peaceful  unification  of  civilizations  around the globe or at least the pacification of relations among them (see Teilhard.  Although Teilhard’s prediction of an Omega Point at  which  there  will  be  a  common-consciousness  shared  by  all  of  humanity  assumes  an  evolutionary  goal-directedness  and  an  optimism  greater  than  that  found in Toynbee and other process thinkers, in some sense all of these thinkers, including  Toynbee,  indicate  the  practical  necessity  and  spiritual  desirability  of  some sort  of  unity  of  the  world’s  civilizations  (see  Romein  1956,  350).    For  all  of  our sakes it is to be hoped that Trumpism and other forms of authoritarian rule, and the deleterious effects such rule has had on efforts to deal with the pandemic and the climate crisis, are temporary impediments in the processual road to the flourishing of all of the world’s current civilizations."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/966/1627)


=Evaluations=

Methodological critiques (from the point of view of process philosophy):


==Gordon Martel and Particular Origins==

DANIEL A. DOMBROWSKI:

"This author notes that Toynbee’s A Study of   History was  a  phenomenal  publishing  success  in  its  day,  but  Toynbee  came  under severe criticism from academic historians.  Further, Martel emphasizes the fact that Toynbee’s global concerns arose out of a very particular background in the intellectual world of pre-1914 Great Britain, especially in terms of Toynbee’s education   at   Winchester   and   Oxford.      Martel   concentrates   on   both   the methodological  concerns  historians  had  with  Toynbee  (in  terms  of  his  alleged  overreliance  on  the  Greco-Roman  world,  his  vague  definitions,  his  reliance  on  
secondary  sources,  etc.)  and  the  fact  that  he  is  one  of  the  fathers  of  a  major  contemporary intellectual movement: world history.  The latter is commendable, according to Martel, due to its critique of the self-centeredness, parochialism, and overspecialization in the way academic history has been written for quite some time.  Not to mention the nationalism and jingoism of much historical work.  That is, Toynbee’s insistence on comparative history should become imperative (Martel 2004, 344).The  underlying  reality  of  mutual  interdependence  is  a  commonplace  in  the  process-relational thought of Whitehead and Hartshorne, in particular, such that Toynbee  should  be  seen  as  applying  this  process-relational  view  to  history  in  addition  to  its  use  in  Whitehead  and  Hartshorne  in  physics,  biology,  and  metaphysics.  Further, it is hard not to take seriously Toynbee’s seminal idea that civilizations  typically  fall  not  due  to  external  contacts.    Rather,  they  commit  suicide when a group that profits from the status quo, the dominant minority, gets in the way of creative advance and selfishly protects its own interests.  In order to avoid becoming an “arrested” civilization that preserves “fossilized remnants” of previous greatness, either the dominant minority must change or be replaced by a new dominant minority (Martel 2004, 345).Even if Toynbee put too much confidence in his overall method, it is arguable that  he  nonetheless  made  valuable  contributions  in  discerning  patterns  in  the  classical past, as when he noted that when Roman proconsuls got used to despotic rule in Spain, Africa, or Gaul, they then harmed Rome a great deal when they brought these despotic habits back home.  These habits eroded the inner life of the civilization.  Toynbee’s own habit of analogical thinking is at the core of the comparative method he used to counteract aforementioned parochialism (Martel 2004, 346-351).The important thing, as Martel rightly states, is to face directly the problem of change and to realize that change is the core of reality and remains stubbornly real.    From  his  time  at  Oxford  Toynbee  had  embraced  this  insight,  which  he  derived  from  the  thought  of  Bergson.    But  change  does  not  occur  haphazardly,  hence the need to understand how it has played out historically on a comparative basis.  In early adulthood Toynbee spent a year in Greece and wondered how it was  that  in  one  age  the  Greeks  had  established  a  great  civilization  and  in  the  contemporary period had fallen into dissolute decay.  This question hardly arises 
without  a  synoptic  view  that  uses  a  wide-  angle  lens,  both  spatially  and  temporally.  In this regard he was not served well as a student by a curriculum that assumed the permanence of the Greek genius (Martel 2004, 352-354).What  Toynbee  found  sobering  at  the  time  of  World  War  One  is  what  we  might find sobering today: that we might be facing the decline and fall of Western civilization and perhaps of civilization itself.  In this regard we ignore Toynbee at our peril and we would be well served to try to improve his project rather than to abandon it altogether (Martel 2004, 355-356; also see McIntire and Perry 1989).

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/966/1627)


==Ian Hall and the Time of  Troubles==

"This author is astute to note that much ofthe ire that was directed at Toynbee was due to the view he held from the 1930s on that religion or a worldview or a cosmological outlook or a vision are at the core  of  a  civilization.    This  is  much  like  the  criticism  that  Whitehead  attracted  when, like Toynbee, he abandoned a youthful religious skepticism and defended a version of theism different from the traditional one.  Religious skeptics never forgave him for “going over” to religion, and religious traditionalists were angered by the processual character of his neoclassical theism.  This interest in processual or Bergsonian open religion and metaphysics in both Whitehead and Toynbee is precisely  what  led  them  out  of  the  academic  mainstream  more  than  their  globalism or their liberal internationalism in politics (Hall 2014, 24-29;  also  see  Dombrowski 2017). This  turn  to  religion,  broadly  conceived,  was  no  doubt  influenced  by  existential crises: in Whitehead’s case by the death of his son in World War One and in Toynbee’s case by the suicide of his son in the 1930s.  But it is also due in Toynbee’s case to the belief that Western civilization was beyond its genesis and growth phases and that only a resurgence of Bergsonian creativity would prevent it from decay and possible fall.  In short, for the past century we have been in a “time of troubles.”  Yet there is a very strong sense in Toynbee that we can avoid becoming  one  of  the  fossil  civilizations  like  the  Sumeric,  Hittite,  Babylonic,  Andean,  Mayan,  Yucatec,  and  Mexico.    The  schism  between  the  dominant  minority and the internal proletariat and the threat of an external proletariat that have typically been found in previous civilizations does not of necessity have to condemn our own (Hall 2014, 30-31; also see Dombrowski 2017, 90). Toynbee  was  convinced  that  the  time  of  troubles  is  largely  due  to  political  leaders, and the citizens in democracies who elect them, who are unable to move 
beyond  the  interests  of  local  or  parochial  sovereign  states.    A  thoroughgoing  internationalism  is  the  only  viable  alternative,  he  thinks,  to  the  breakdown  of  modern civilizations.  It would be a mistake, he also thinks, not to learn from the Romans  that  suppression  of  an  internal  proletariat  and  war  against  an  external  one  are  not  long-term  solutions  to  the  problem  of  bringing  about  civilizational  flourishing.    As  the  title  to  one  of  Toynbee’s  many  books  puts  it,  civilization  at  present  is  on  trial.    Toynbee’s  internationalism  and  his  turn  toward  religion  are  connected in that he thought that Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, and Buddhism, etc., are different paths up the same mountain, at the summit of which are to be found  cognate  ideas  like:  God  is  love,  compassion  is  the  key,  and  so  on.    The  presence of Buddhism in this list indicates that there can be versions of nontheistic religion  that  are  conducive  to  the  sort  of  spiritual  renewal  that  Toynbee  has  in  mind (Hall 2014, 32-34).If  Toynbee  is  today  somewhat  unfashionable,  there  might  be  some  good  reasons for this, given the understandable concerns on the part of those historians who see the benefits of staying close to the evidence without undue speculation, but there are also some really bad reasons for Toynbee (and Whitehead, Bergson, Hartshorne, and Teilhard) being out-of-step with contemporary academe.  Desire for spiritual renewal does not have to be associated with supernaturalism in the pejorative  sense,  with  a  belief  in  miracles,  or  with  denigration  of  the  body.    Thankfully,  there  are  also  aspects  of  Toynbee  that  have  now  become  common  wisdom  and  that  might  help  us  see  our  way  through  this  time  of  troubles:  that  Western  imperialism  is  not  to  be  defended,  that  there  are  great  civilizations  in  addition to that of the West, etc. (Hall 2014, 35-36)."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/966/1627)


==Krishan  Kumar  and  the  Return  of   Civilization==

"This  author  argues  that  “civilization” in recent years has made something of a comeback, which bodes well for Toynbee studies in that Toynbee was the greatest historian and analyst of civilization in the 20th century.  The criticisms of Toynbee’s work that surfaced in the 1950s themselves now look a bit dated.  The return of civilization studies noted by Kumar is due at least in part to the work of Samuel Huntington on the clash  of  civilizations,  most  notably  the  clash  between  Western  civilization  and  Islamic  civilization,  but  also  involving  Byzantine  civilization  as  embodied  in  Russia and Chinese civilization.  That is, the “return of civilization” forces us to look East, to literally “re-orient” ourselves in order to understand where we are  at present.  The threats not only to Western civilization, but to civilization itself, are also highlighted in Jared Diamond’s influential scholarship (see Kumar 2014, 815-818).  In  addition  to  the  clash  of  civilizations  revitalizing  the  study  of  the  sort  of  subject  matter  treated  by  Toynbee,  there is  also  the  impetus  that  comes  from  environmental  studies  wherein  an  ecological  mode  of  thinking  seems  to  be  welded  to  an  equally  expansive  civilizational  mode  of  thinking,  in  contrast  to  thinking at the level of national prejudice.  Global history is quite understandably “in,”  as  is  (unfortunately)  the  explosive  reaction  against  globalization  (Kumar  2014, 819-820).   Of  course,  the  very  idea  of  civilization  is  controversial.    The  word  was  apparently  first  used  in  18th  century  France,  a  use  that  had  a  moral  and  prescriptive sense and, it should be noted, a processualsense of gradually moving away from barbarism.  But the odious character of this conception of civilization may  very  well  be  due  to  the  ethnocentric  way  in  which  the  concept  was  been  applied, rather than to the concept itself.  The word “barbarism” itself is derived from  the  Greek  barbaros,  a  word  that  mimics  how  those  who  spoke  languages  other  than  Greek  sounded  to  ancient  Greek  speakers:  ba  ba  ba.    It  is  precisely this  sort  of  ethnocentrism  that  Toynbee’s  synoptic  view  is  meant  to  counteract.    One can admire Norbert Elias’s related work The Civilizing Process without giving in to ethnocentrism or to Western exceptionalism.  Or again, defense of the civilizing process does not necessarily entail unfair or  oppressive  treatment  of  other  cultures  or  of  “arrested”  civilizations,  as  post-colonial  followers  of  Jean-Jacques  Rousseau  might  think  in  their  defense  of  indigeneity.  Of course, there are uses of “primitive” and “savage” that are very bothersome,  but  there  are  other  more  literal  uses  where  “primitive”  (from  the  Latin) means first, as in the honorific Canadian designation of indigenous people as “First Nations.”  Likewise, when Henry David Thoreau says, with the approval of  environmentalists  everywhere,  that  in  wildness  lies  the  preservation  of  the  world,  it  is  noteworthy  that  in  French  “wildness”  would  be  rendered  as  sauvage(Kumar 2014, 821; Thoreau, “Walking”).It  is  of  paramount  importance  that  in  reference  to  Toynbee  we  speak  of  civilizations  in  the  plural  and  that  we  avoid  any  suggestion  that  the  Western  variety exhausts the historical evidence.  Even as the term “civilization” fell into 
disfavor, in several disciplines it was transmuted into “culture” and clearly there are  a  great  number  of  cultures  in  the  world.    As  Kumar  puts  the  point,  “anthropologists  were  digesting  civilization  and  regurgitating  it  as  culture”  (Kumar 2014, 825).  “Society” is another cognate term that is used by Toynbee himself.  What is crucial is that civilizations (or cultures or societies) be seen in flux and as liable to degeneration and that some sense be made of how to reverse the  degeneration.    One  of  the  reasons  why  history  is  needed  (and  not  merely  sociology,  political  science,  and  other  social  sciences)  is  that  only  by  studying  previous  civilizations  are  we  able  to  see  how  the  plots  of  civilizations  work  out  their conclusions.  Further, civilizations doe not merely die, but they also in the process of dying prepare the way for their successors.  Civilizations are not static conditions, but dynamic movements of an evolutionary kind, movements that can (but not necessarily) come to an end (Kumar 2014, 826-831).Civilizational  analysis,  especially  of  a  comparative  kind,  always  seems  to  involve disputes regarding the units of analysis, but the fact that these units can arise, flourish, decline, and fall is a given.  Kumar also wishes to defend the thesis that collective memories and practices in a civilization can be traced back to an ancient past, a tracing that eludes the grasp of interpreters whose units of analysis are too small.  Such a tracing is obvious in the case of longstanding civilizations like  the  Indic or the Sinic, but it is also in evidence in the history of Germany, where  the  extent  of  the  flourishing  of  Catholicism  in  the  southern  part  of  that  country covers roughly the same territory as the advance of the Roman Empire into  that  part  of  the  world  centuries  before.    Affection  for  (or  disaffection  from)  Rome is historically conditioned by forces deep in the past.  One wants, indeed one needs, a unit of analysis with a long reach."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/966/1627)



=Excerpts=

==[[Arnold Toynbee on the Process of Civilizational Transition]]==


From the reading notes of Michel Bauwens, 2023:

Contra Spengler, Toynbee affirms:

- "Growths of civilizations are not predestined to any uniform duration

- We have failed to find any reason, a priori, why a civilization should not go on growing indefinitely

- Breakdowns overtake them at widely different ages." (p. 367)


...

"Differences between growing civilizations are extensive and profound. '''><''' Disintegration tends to conform, in all cases, to a standard pattern:

1. a horizontal schism splitting society into three fractions 2. the creation, be each of these fractions, of a characteristic institution." (p. 368)

(i.e. "universal state, universal church, and barbarian warbands)


...

These institutions are something more than products of the disintegration process .. In particular, 'universal churches' (may be) .. representative of another species of society, which is at least as distinct from the sphere of 'civilizations', as the latter are distinct from 'primitive societies'." (p. 368)


=More information=

Excerpts via [http://ahistoryofthepresentananthology.blogspot.com/2013/07/a-study-of-history-by-arnold-toynbee.html]

A selection from Civilization on Trial, a collection of essay's and lectures by Arnold Toynbee published in 1948 [http://ahistoryofthepresentananthology.blogspot.com/2016/03/civilization-on-trial-by-arnold-toynbee.html]

Sorokin’s summary of Toynbee: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1874765 


* John David Ebert recommends 

#the 2-volume abridged version, which was approved by Toynbee.
#a one volume abridged and illustrated version, written by Toynbee himself in 1972, 3 years before he died.

Online version at https://archive.org/details/studyofhistory0005toyn


'''* Article: The Return of Civilization—and of Arnold Toynbee? By Krishan Kumar. Cambridge University Press:  03 October 2014'''

URL = https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/comparative-studies-in-society-and-history/article/return-of-civilizationand-of-arnold-toynbee/FE6F858900CBB1843DD7C0D3DD5BE360

"This paper considers the history of the concept of civilization, and argues for the continuing importance and relevance of Toynbee's multi-volume A Study of History within that tradition. The claim is that, whatever the weaknesses of Toynbee's general approach, the civilizational perspective he adopts allows him to cast an illuminating light on many important historical questions. Moreover his belief in the “philosophical contemporaneity” and equal value of all civilizations should make him peculiarly attractive to those many today who reject Eurocentrism and who are increasingly persuaded of the need to consider the total human experience from earliest times up to the present."

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Books]]