

From http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol12/issue2/ertmer.html

Source: Ertmer, P. A, Richardson, J. C., Belland, B., Camin, D., Connolly, P., Coulthard, G. et. al. (2007). '''Using peer feedback to enhance the quality of student online postings''': An exploratory study. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(2), article 4


=Description=

All excerpts from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol12/issue2/ertmer.html


==Feedback generally==

"Nicol and Macfarlane-Dick (2006) suggest that feedback serves as a form of formative assessment, designed to improve and accelerate learning. Specifically, they describe feedback as "anything that might strengthen the students' capacity to self-regulate their own performances" (p. 206). According to the authors, good feedback performs the following functions:

   
1. clarifies what good performance is (goals, criteria, standards)
   
2. facilitates the development of self-assessment and reflection
   
3. delivers high quality information to students about their learning
   
4. encourages teacher and peer dialogue around learning
   
5. encourages positive motivational beliefs and self esteem
   
6. provides opportunities to close the gap between current and desired performance
   
7. provides information to teachers that can help shape teaching (p. 3)."


==Online Feedback specifically==

"Feedback may be even more important in online environments than in traditional classrooms (Lynch, 2002; Palloff & Pratt, 2001). That is, due to a lack of feedback, students in online courses are more likely to disconnect from the material or environment than students attending face-to-face courses (Ko & Rossen, 2001). While instructor feedback is often cited as the catalyst for student learning in online environments, lack of feedback is most often cited as the reason for withdrawing from online courses.

Due to the criticality of feedback in online environments, a number of recommendations have been made for increasing its effectiveness. Notar, Wilson, and Ross (2002) specifically call for feedback that is "diagnostic and prescriptive, formative and iterative, and involving both peers and group assessment" (p. 646). According to these authors, feedback should focus on improving the skills needed for the construction of end products more than on the end products themselves. While students agree that feedback needs to contain a summative aspect, they also desire formative comments. As Schwartz and White (cited in Mory, 2004) report, students expect feedback in an online environment to be: 1) prompt, timely, and thorough; 2) ongoing formative (about online discussions) and summative (about grades); 3) constructive, supportive, and substantive; 4) specific, objective, and individual; and 5) consistent.

Indeed, research has shown that the quality of student discussion responses can be increased through the use of constructive feedback that is prompt, consistent, and ongoing (Ertmer & Stepich, 2004)."


==Peer Feedback==


"One possible solution is for instructors to capitalize on peer feedback as an instructional strategy, requiring students to provide feedback to one another while simultaneously encouraging greater levels of interaction. Depending on how the peer feedback process is structured, instructors could be spared from evaluating large numbers of student postings, yet still provide ample instances of formative and summative feedback. Students, on the other hand, would still receive the feedback they require in order to assess their progress in the online environment.

'''Advantages to Using Peer Feedback'''

The use of peer feedback in an online learning environment offers a number of distinct advantages including: increasing the timeliness of feedback, providing new learning opportunities for both givers and receivers of feedback, humanizing the environment, and building community (Corgan, Hammer, Margolies, & Crossley, 2004). By asking students to provide constructive feedback to each other, instructors are inviting them to participate in each other's learning and thus achieve greater understanding and appreciation for their peers' experiences and perspectives. Moreover, by engaging students in the feedback process, meaningful interaction increases—interaction with peers and interaction with the content of the discussion postings—which subsequently promotes students' satisfaction with the course (Richardson & Swan, 2003) and with the instructor (Fulford & Zhang, 1998). If used effectively, both instructor and peer feedback have the potential to increase the quality of discourse, and thus the quality of learning, in the online environment.

In addition to the benefits of receiving adequate feedback, students may also benefit from giving peer feedback. Liu, Lin, Chiu and Yuan (2001) propose that, when asked to offer feedback to peers, students progress beyond the cognitive processes required for completing a given task, as they must now "read, compare, or question ideas, suggest modifications, or even reflect on how well one's own work is compared with others" (p. 248). McConnell (2002) suggests that collaborative assessment moves students away from dependence on instructors as the only, or major, source of judgment about the quality of learning to a "more autonomous and independent situation where each individual develops the experience, know-how, and skills to assess their own learning" (p. 89). Thus, students are offered the opportunity not only to reflect on the work of their peers but also on their own work, which over time can lead to increased learning."


=More Information=

Details on the findings of the study at
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol12/issue2/ertmer.html

Meyer, K. (2004). Evaluating online discussions: Four different frames of analysis. Journal of Asynchronous Networks, 8 (2). Retrieved June 6, 2005 from http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v8n2/v8n2_meyer.asp

Richardson, J. C., & Swan, K. (2003). An examination of social presence in online courses in relation to student's perceived learning and satisfaction. Journal of Asynchronous Learning, 7 (1). Retrieved March 8, 2006 from http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v7n1/v7n1_richardson.asp


[[Category:Education]]