
URL = https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Students_for_Free_Culture


=Description=

'''1.'''

"Students for Free Culture, an international chapter-based student organization that, in very general terms, advocates for the idea of an intellectual property commons.  We celebrate the benefits of sharing, remixing, and interacting with culture in a way that is participatory and democratic rather than hierarchical and “top-down”.  As an organization, we are expanding our notions of what free culture can mean to causes like access to scientific research and access to essential medicines.  But historically we have focused on DRM and technological equality issues like net neutrality.

Students for Free Culture was founded at Swarthmore College in 2004 following the publication of Prof. Lawrence Lessig’s book Free Culture, and has since grown to over 30 chapters around the world.  Our most recent gathering took place this year on October 11th and 12th here at Berkeley, which included discussions on access to medicine in the developing world, copyright reform, and open access to scientific research through open journals, with keynotes by Prof. Pam Samuelson from Berkeley Law, Prof. Lawrence Lessig of Stanford Law, and Mozilla CEO John Lilly.  At the end of the our “unconference” day, organized by participants in the first day, Students for Free Culture set a 12 month agenda to investigate and grade universities’ policies towards internet usage, research publication, course materials, open source platform support, and patent licensing.

In broader terms, we would like to see scientific, cultural, and technological commons available for the benefit of all people.  Our most general goals are to raise awareness for the benefits of a commons in these areas and to directly advocate institutional roadblocks for further development."
(http://www.massthink.net/2008/12/06/networked-politics-seminar-dec-7th/)


2. From the Wikipedia [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Students_for_Free_Culture]

"Students for Free Culture, formerly known as FreeCulture.org, is an international student organization working to promote free culture ideals, such as cultural participation and access to information. It was inspired by the work of former Stanford, now Harvard, law professor Lawrence Lessig, who wrote the book Free Culture, and it frequently collaborates with other prominent free culture NGOs, including Creative Commons, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and Public Knowledge. Students for Free Culture has over 30 chapters on college campuses around the world, and a history of grassroots activism.

Students for Free Culture is sometimes referred to as "FreeCulture", "the Free Culture Movement", and other variations on the "free culture" theme, but none of those are its official name. It is officially Students for Free Culture, as set for in the new bylaws that were ratified by its chapters on October 1, 2007, which changed its name from FreeCulture.org to Students for Free Culture."


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Culture]]