=More Information=

==Bibliography==

* Mirzoeff, Nicholas. Endebt and punish. Occupy 2012. 2012 Mar 2. 

Available from: http://www.nicholasmirzoeff.com/O2012/2012/03/02/endebt-and-punish/. Accessed 2012 Mar 4. Archived by WebCite at http://www.webcitation.org/65uPZHxRc. 

"Mirzoeff synthesizes his own observations of the effects of oppressive debt on students with the insights of David Graeber’s Debt: the first 5,000 years and Angela Davis’s Foucauldian critique of the prison-industrial complex. He sees student debt as a mechanism of social control, designed to limit freedom of expression by making current and former students vulnerable to retaliation for any deviation from conformity."
(http://dedicto.com/wordpress1/bib/)


* Williams, Jeffrey J. Academic freedom and indentured students. Academe. 2012 Jan–Feb; 98(1):10–15. 

Available from: http://www.aaup.org/AAUP/pubsres/academe/2012/JF/Feat/will.htm. 

"Williams compares student debt to indentured servitude. He proposes that the AAUP should make the abolition of student debt a major policy goal, on the ground that debt constrains the “freedom of intellectual exploration” of students by limiting their career choices and otherwise diverting their efforts to debt management and repayment. Williams also proposes that the AAUP reconsider its traditional conception of academic freedom as pertaining almost exclusively to faculty, rather than students."
(http://dedicto.com/wordpress1/bib/)


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Education]]