'''= A study circle is a small group of people who meet multiple times to discuss an issue. Study circles may be formed to discuss anything from politics to religion to hobbies. They are differentiated from clubs by their focus on exploring an issue or topic rather than on activities or socializing.''' [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Study_circle]


=History=


"The study circle concept ... developed in early 20th century Sweden as a part of the activities in popular movements, such as the temperance and the workers' movements. Since these movements' participants were working class or small farmers the study circles were important i relation to these classes' growing political power in the early 20th century. The issues that were studied were already from the early period broad - it could be as well political and social issues as literature or even school topics. The population as a whole were generally literate as early as the 17th century, and therefore literacy training was not an important concern as a topic for study circles. Other nonformal educations as folk high schools and popular lectures were already present, when study circles were developed and there were various kinds of connections between these different forms of studies open for adults with only compulsory shooling as formal education. Study circles arose with ambitions to create an educated citizenry.

In Sweden today study circles are a mass phenomenon and have broad national support. Around 300,000 study circles have been reported each year since the 1970s. National educational associations receive annual subsidies from the national government and work with folk high schools (folkhögskolor), university short courses, correspondence study and distance learning, allowing citizens to understand and participate more fully in their communities and nation. The Swedish study circle model was successfully transplanted into American culture, most notably in the National Issues Forums (sponsored by the Domestic Policy Association in Dayton, Ohio) and the Bricklayers and Allied Craftsmen's Study Circle Program which began in 1986.

Today, with the growth of the internet, virtual study circles are possible, but the original model of face-to-face communication and real-world, rather than virtual, interaction retains its wide appeal.

Study circles are also being employed as a change process and development activity within corporations. Some of the same ideas and concepts of community study circles can be applied to internal issues such as diversity, race relations and community-focused giving.

Study Circles have been used extensively in Australia for some years to engage citizens in issues as diverse as Reconciliation between Indigenous and Non- Indigenous Australians, and tackling environmental disasters like Blue-Green Algae in the nations river systems. Adult Learning Australia has championed the use of study circles for many years. More recently the Australian Study Circles Network has developed as a central resource for study circle practitioners in Australia."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Study_circle)



[[Category:Education]]