
'''= "working group for the New Economy Conference in September 2017 in Brisbane, Australia".'''  

URL =  https://neweconomy.org.au/


=Description=

Patricia Morgan:

"How is subjective experience relevant in the New Economy?  How might we work together on this?

We’re suggesting that our ‘inner’ or subjective life (containing foundational aspects of our somatic, cognitive, affective, intersubjective and spiritual modes of being) grounds and directs our ‘outer’ or objective experience.  That deep change, a central aim of the New Economy, can only happen if we have deep (subjective) engagement with the fundaments of that change. 

The problem is that our ability to access the inner landscape has become atrophied through fragmented or constant partial attention and the accelerating pace of life.  If we agree that our actions in the world are initiated in the inner realm, feed through our different modes of being to appear in our values, attitudes and actions, then what are the best ways to re-orient ourselves inwards?"
(email May 2017)

=Discussion=

Patricia Morgan:

"This is a short definition of my understanding of “subjective experience”

My understanding of subjective experience as it occurs in internal space is of a multi-dimensional experience of foundational aspects of our different modes of human experience such as our somatic or bodily, mental or cognitive, affective or emotional, transcendental or spiritual and the intersubjective.  I think of subjective experience as having levels starting with the internal dialogue, we often experience as sentences spoken internally followed by other aspects of our modes of being, sometimes experienced individually other times as an entanglement of these modes.  Offering this illustration isn’t to suggest that there is a ‘hierarchy’ to these levels with one being more significant than another, though we may be more aware of the ‘cognitive’ or ‘worded’ level.  Subjective or inner space contains memory both worded and somatic and is entrained through daily experience. This is an aspect of us that the media, politicians, film makers, advertisers frequently attempt to engage or manipulate.  It can also be entrained in the ‘opposite direction’ by contemplative practices such as meditation, so that awareness of our subjective experience is enhanced.  In other words it can be both mute and manipulated sometimes described as “unconscious subjective experience” and it can be a ground of heightened meta-awareness in which we are attuned to the foundational ground of our modes of being and of patterns laid down in us from birth and possibly beyond."  
(email, May 2017)  



[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Australia]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Research]]