
=Discussion=

Kojin Karatani:

"What  was  the  situation with state  society that  emerged after clan society?  It  may appear to be  grounded primarily in violent  exploitation, but  in fact  it  is  also based on a  kind of ‘exchange.’ While  not  ordinarily regarded as  a  kind of  exchange, what  we  find here  is  an exchange  of  submission for  protection.9  The  state  has  its  beginnings  in conquest  and violent domination, but  it  can only become  a  sustained form  of  rule  when the  ruled willingly  submit  to it. This  becomes  possible  when they receive  protection in return for their submission—in other words, when the  relation of  ruler/ruled becomes  a  kind of  exchange. This  gives  rise  to a  form  of ‘power’ other than violence. This  power binds  not  only the  ruled, but  also the  rulers, because  if the  rulers  are  unable  to protect  the  ruled, they will  lose  their position as  rulers. In this  sense, this relationship is  bilateral  (reciprocal), so that  in a  sense  it  is  related to mode  of  exchange  A.    I call  this  form  of  exchange  mode  B. Just  as  with mode  of  exchange  A, a  kind of  nonmaterial  ‘power’  is  at  work in mode  B. But  this  is  something  born out  of  ‘exchange’ itself, not something that  somehow  bubbled up from  within the  ideational  superstructure. If  we  consider mode  of  exchange  to constitute  the  economic  base  of  a  social  formation, the  state  is  not something that  originates  in the  superstructure, outside  the  realm  of  the  economic, but  rather is directly rooted in a  specific  form  of  exchange—that  is  to say, in the  economic  base, broadly conceived. Gramsci’s  “hegemony,”  Althusser’s  “ideational  apparatuses,”  and Foucault’s “knowledge-power”  all  come  not  from  a  superstructure  that  is  autonomous  from  the  economic base, but  rather from  the  economic  base  itself. Moreover, those  entities  that  Freud regarded as “psychological  factors”  in order to distinguish them  from  the  economic  realm  also in fact originate  from  modes  of  exchange  and hence  are, in the  broad sense, of  the  economic  base.  

Note: In  Leviathan, Hobbes  argued that  the  condition of  peace  was  produced via  a  social  contract from  out  of  the  ‘natural  condition’ of  struggle  of  all  against  all. This  social  contract  was, he  says, a  covenant  “extorted by fear.”  This  means  it  was  a  kind of  exchange, because  those  who submitted were  granted their lives  in exchange  for submitting. Moreover, the  rulers  were  placed under an obligation to carry out  their end as  well. In this  sense, we  can say that  Hobbes understood the  state  in terms  of  mode  of  exchange  B. But  theorists  from  Locke  on have  thought of  the  ‘social  contract’ only in terms  of  mode  of  exchange  C."

(http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf)

=More info=
* [[Introduction To Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Evolution of the Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Historical Approach to Shifts in Modes of Exchange]]
* [[From Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Kojin Karatani on Why We Should Move from Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Power and Modes of Exchange]]
* [[Mode Of Production]]


[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]