
'''= illegal acts designed to make the public sphere a better place. ''' 


=Description=


David Bollier: 

"They are acts of commoners who are fed up with the failure of officialdom to take care of the public good.  For example:


UnterGunther is a Swiss-French urban explorers team whose main activity is to restore invisible parts of public heritage in total clandestinity.  They infiltrated the Pantheon in Paris and started, with the help of professional clockmaker Jean-Baptiste Viot, to restore the abandoned monumental 1850 Wagner clock.  By secretly organizing workshops, the clock is now operational again after years of bureaucratic neglect.


Another such project, Guerilla Public Service, an artists’ collective in Los Angeles, has dressed up as city employees to install missing information on freeway signs “to aid drivers to their destinations and ease traffic blockage.”  Then there are “guerilla gardeners” who bring their “trowels, plants and vision” to neglected public spaces and turn them into beautiful, unauthorized gardens.

How shall we interpret such acts?  UnterGunther said in an interview:  “We are the counterpoint to an era where everything is slow and complicated.  It’s very difficult to get anything done through official channels.  If you want to do it, you have to be clandestine.”  For those who wish the world to “practice random acts of kindness,” the guerilla commoners seem to be heroes."
(http://onthecommons.org/node/1240)

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]