
'''= an open, non-hierarchical, collaborative community of humans, including tech developers, citizen scientists, activists, artists ... interested in and working towards social change.'''

URL = http://sudoroom.org/


=Description=

'''1.'''

"Sudo Room is an open, non-hierarchical, collaborative community of humans, including tech developers, citizen scientists, activists, artists--and all combinations in between and beyond!--who are interested in and working towards social change. Our goal is to create the first inclusive, dedicated hackerspace in downtown Oakland, to share ideas and projects in citizen science, digital citizenship and literacy, environmental sustainability, community engagement, and self-government.

Sudo Room is committed to access, empowerment, transparency, and public/social good. Sudoers have a great diversity of interests and we emphasize respect and solidarity among ourselves and with others."


2.

'Sudo Room is a creative community that has open membership, and is non-hierarchical and collaborative. We are all types: tech developers, citizen scientists, activists, artists, and all combinations inbetween and beyond. But most importantly: we are all human beings interested in and working towards positive social change. Our goal is to create an inclusive, dedicated hackerspace in downtown Oakland and to share ideas and projects in the following areas:

* the creative use of technology

* citizen science

* digital citizenship and literacy

* environmental sustainability

* community engagement

* self-government

Sudo Room is committed to access, empowerment, transparency, and public good. Sudoers have a great diversity of interests and we emphasize respect and solidarity among ourselves and with others.



Sudo Room is located at 2141 Broadway in downtown Oakland. Entrance on 22nd St."


=Status / History=

Jenny Ryan, Nov. 2012:

'In May, we had a kickstarter/fundraiser (calling it a 'kickraiser') featuring a panel of Bay Area hackerspace representatives, including BioCurious (a DIY biotech space in Sunnyvale), HackerMoms (a hackerspace for moms in Berkeley) and The Crucible (a fine and industrial arts education space in Oakland) as well as the aforementioned (Noisebridge, LOL and Ace Monster Toys). Participants spoke on the topic of “Hackerspaces: The Necessity for Community Spaces Here and Everywhere.”

Come summer, we'd moved into a space – of sorts – an eclectic building also home to a psychic, an improv theater group, a nurse's training organization and a gun security instructor. We rented the box office and a tiny orange closet, giving us access to the large classroom space and two smaller back rooms. For better or worse, the improv theater folks hold auditions in the classroom every weekday evening. We have our meetings in the back room, but the open ceilings prevent any possibility of privacy – our voices often straining to be heard over the raucous hollering and silly sounds of the actors.

Despite the limitations of the space, we made the most of our momentum: We worked together to develop a governance structure, get a bank account, and forge a compact.

We also made the most of our location in uptown Oakland by hosting events for the monthly First Friday Art Murmur. For August's Art Murmur, we took the opportunity to stage a public announcement declaring our Intent to Exist – a requisite for obtaining a bank account without a federal tax ID – followed by an attempt to see how many hackers we could fit in our small box office space (the answer? 42.)

Sudo Room has also been in a courtship with Coyote Counter Collective, an Oakland-based workers' cooperative workshop and retail space for fashion designers, leatherworkers, and other kinds of functional, sustainable artistry. Our clothes-hacking night during September's Art Murmur featured electronic conductive thread and LEDs sewn onto donated clothing and homemade hats.

Just this week, Sudo Room voted unanimously to move into the larger space at 2141 Broadway St. We intend to hold a series of fundraisers throughout Oakland throughout the end of November and the first week of December to ensure we keep member dues as low as possible."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/hacking-the-commons-how-to-start-a-hackerspace)

=More Information=

* [[Bay Area DIY Communities]]



[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Places]]