=Discussion=

"Kate Shea Baird, a member of the Barcelona en Comú executive, said it was a tenet of urbanism that public space should compensate for lack of private space. “In the lockdown we saw the most extreme version of this, with families living in a single room for months, unable to go out for walks, which really brought home the inequalities in housing,” she said. “Now with bars and restaurants closed, the only place you can go is public space, and this a unique opportunity to generate consensus around the subject.”

Building on that consensus, the city has published its 10-year plan for the greening of the city, prioritising pedestrians, residents and other street users over cars. At the heart of its radical public space policy are so-called “superblocks”.

The superblock scheme groups together nine city blocks and closes them to through traffic with plant pots and benches, introduces cycle lanes, play areas and green spaces, and eliminates most parking spaces. While cars aren’t banned, the superblocks are car-unfriendly.


There are six so far, as many as 11 more are planned over the next three years, and there could be more than 500 if the plan is carried out in its entirety. In the two years since the second superblock was inaugurated in the Sant Antoni barrio, traffic has fallen by 80% and NO2 pollution by 33%. Noise levels have dropped by 5 decibels.

Sílvia Casorrán, 41, has lived in the former industrial barrio of Poblenou all her life and lives in what became the city’s first superblock in 2016. Unlike subsequent schemes, the aims of the Poblenou project were poorly communicated and residents were scarcely consulted, so there was considerable opposition at first. Now there is almost none, and Casorrán says being a superblock has transformed the barrio.

“Before we shopped and socialised in other parts of the barrio,” she said. “There was no life here. But now it’s hard to even get out of the super block because there are so many people who stop and talk. That’s the big change – the way we use the space and getting to know our neighbours. We’ve got three playgrounds and picnic areas where everyone congregates. You get kids doing their homework, elderly people playing Parcheesi, a democratisation of space just through putting in four picnic tables. There’s a real sense of identity with the place.”

In five years, Colau’s government has doubled the city’s network of cycle lanes from 120km to 241km and eliminated 3,500 parking spaces. It has also made the entire city a low-emissions zone and created car-free areas around schools, and it has not discounted introducing a London-style congestion zone.

Despite predictable criticism from the local motorists’ association, the plan has met little popular opposition, and there has been none of the hostility seen in the UK to similar schemes. Indeed, it has received widespread public support.

Superblocks take time to implement, so the immediate response to the pandemic was to create more public space with so-called “tactical urbanism”, a low-intervention strategy adopted in cities as diverse as Paris, Bogotá and Los Angeles. As well as creating cycle lanes, the tactic has been to reclaim traffic lanes for pedestrians, often just by painting the pedestrian area another colour and separating it with concrete blocks, and by closing selected streets.

Four major Barcelona streets that have been subjected to this tactical urbanism will be the first to be incorporated into the new plan. They will become what are in effect linear superblocks with a total of 21 new green spaces and 21 public squares, the design of which is being put out to international competition. This first phase is expected to cost €37.8m.

By 2030, one in three Eixample streets will have undergone the same treatment, leaving no resident more than 200 metres from a green space or a public square.

“It’s difficult to reclaim public space in a city that’s so dense,” said Garbino Carballo, who works for the city as a landscape architect and is also spokesman on nature-based solutions at the Spanish Association of Parks and Gardens.

“The only public space we have left is the space occupied by cars. To me, as a landscape architect, I’m interested in the fact that the street doesn’t have a fixed form. We can change it. If you start breaking up pavements and planting more trees, you can bring about a better environmental understanding of how the city works. Instead of investing in capital spending in spectacular projects, we should invest in maintaining and conserving what we have. It may not sound very sexy, but it doesn’t get you into debt and it creates sustainable jobs.”"
(https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/dec/23/two-way-street-how-barcelona-is-democratising-public-space)

=More information=

* The city's ten-year plan: Towards Superblock Barcelona, https://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/premsa/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/201111-DOSSIER-Superilla-Barcelona-EN.pdf

[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Spain]]
[[Category:Policy]]