
=Discussion=

The concept as used by Pitirim Sorokin, explained by

'''Barry V. Johnston:'''

"For Sorokin real altruization must occur at three interrelated levels: the personal, cultural, and social. 

Individual change would precede social and cultural change. Sorokin argued that all mindful persons must
begin with themselves. Specifically, they must allow their superconsciousness increasing control of their consciousness. Superconsciousness
is our capacity to see and become one with the eternal. This capacity
can be more fruitfully developed through meditation than education.

Indeed, much of the Center's work was on meditation as means of spiritual growth and altruization.

With the growth of our spirit (Superconsciousness) altruization can
be intensified, first by the performance of small tasks that require that
awareness be transformed into action. Quietly, the individual begins to
feel and express the power of love by following the Buddha or practicing the small acts of altruism suggested by The Sermon on the Mount
and Christianity. The Sermon on the Mount and the Beatitudes forecast
religious happiness for those who are largely without wealth or position
on earth.

Sorokin saw more than biblical injunctions in these passages; he saw
the prescription for a good life and a good society. If one wanted to
eliminate social problems and evil, then fashion better people. The Sermon told us how to do this by incorporating these values into our social
roles. For example, as a parent one takes care of children in ways that
are beneficial to their nature and development. As an artist or politician
one stops producing vulgarized trash or unjust legislation. As a scientist
or inventor one should work for the common good rather than on a
destructive arsenal that pushes us closer to nuclear madness. As a teacher
one creates in students a quality of mind that seeks truth and good, rather
than producing mindless entities whose expertise is found only in the
blind application of a paradigm to problems that may be destructive to
mankind. As a businessman, a laborer, mechanic, or a clerk, individuals
perform their roles either directed by altruism or egoism and thus contribute to the prosocial or antisocial climate of society. Sorokin viewed
the total fabric of culture as the product of millions of trifling acts and
individual deeds. If each of us simply avoids the selfish abuse of our
functions, then the world is improved. But if we each attempt to altruize
our actions, then the world is enriched.

The modification of social and cultural institutions occurs through the
concerted efforts of individuals acting in groups organized, integrated,
and merged into federations and associations. These groups develop methods for increasing altruism. They also devise plans for the transformation
of society. It is their function to convince ever larger segments of society
of the urgency and feasibility of the Integral reconstruction of humanity.

Their integrated activities will progressively transform Integral values,
norms, and ideas into cultural, social, and personal realities. Through these
bodies pressure is put on nation states and international organizations to
change in the desired direction. Thus individual behavior, cultural values,
and social institutions are modified in an orderly fashion and in compliance with Integral values. Eventually the entire sociocultural system becomes more peaceful and creative (Sorokin 1948,235-36).

This reconstruction of society was based on the pursuit of Integral
truth. Humanity sought Integral truth by becoming more altruistic, and
through altruism the ultimate Integral value became part of humanity
and society. In turn, a new Integral culture evolves, which gives us a
better grasp of ourselves and the cosmos. Through this culture we move
to perfect our nature and advance toward a world at peace."

(Source: Sorokin's Life and Work. Barry V. Johnston. Chapter 1 of "Sorokin and Civilization")

[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]