'''Surveillant Assemblage = ariety of technological systems used by state and
non-state entities to monitor citizens'''

Concept developed in: Kevin Haggerty and Richard Ericson. "The surveillant assemblage,"
British Journal of Sociology 51 (4), pp. 605-622.


=Discussion=


From an article by Sam Nunn in CTheory.net, at
http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=518


"Building on a theoretical foundation of panopticism and social
control, Kevin Haggerty and Richard Ericson coined an appropriate
concept for the variety of technological systems used by state and
non-state entities to monitor citizens: the surveillant
assemblage. The assemblage is composed of many discrete
technological forms used to observe and infer patterns of behavior in
the interests of control, investigation, and crime prevention. This
includes closed circuit TV, governmental and corporate data bases,
data mining and synthesis software, electronic surveillance systems,
data-based profiling techniques, scenario analysis, the integration
of criminal justice data bases, biometric identifiers, and so on.

Information feeds to the war on terror can be conceived as
representative components of a surveillant assemblage -- a
combination of surveillance tools used for various forms of social
control, in particular those devoted to uncovering terrorist and
criminal conspiracies and preventing violent crime. It is the set of
surveillance components pulled together to provide information used
to detect or stop crimes of violence.

Surveillant assemblages have been depicted in various ways by films
and TV, and it's possible that a few movies and television shows can
be read as information feeds to the war on terror. Sometimes we use
technologies to prognosticate and prevent violence, the theme of ~The
Conversation~, ~Minority Report~, and ~The End of Violence~. The
preventive scheme of ~Minority Report~ is the most direct: you're
under arrest for the crime you almost committed. But at other times,
in the event violent actors strike before we can stop them, there are
policies, plans, and contingencies -- ways to make us safe again,
tactical technologies. That's the hard-edged, reactive theme of ~The
Siege~. And for those situations where a crime is committed, at least
one TV program presents an argument that our technologies will
uncover truths that no one but the perpetrator could know. That's the
theme of ~CSI~.

These films show how humans generate and process surveillance
information into fuel against crime and terror (as they perceive it),
and offer cultural representations of the surveillant assemblage. The
examples examined in these films and TV suggest a complex
relationship between the social and political realities of wars on
crime or terror or drugs and their representation in film and media.

The relationship is based less on whether one or the other is a
better reflection of 'reality' than the idea that both filmed
renditions and police policies are drawn from dominant cultural
beliefs about criminal and terrorist behaviors. Shortly after 9/11, a
brigadier general chaired several meetings of selected Hollywood
writers, producers, and directors to develop terrorism scenarios that
had not been considered before, as potential fuel for the development
of preventive strategies. Hollywood imagination would supply the
fuel for actual anti-terrorism tactics. The meetings were held in Los
Angeles at USC's Institute for Creative Technologies, whose operating
revenues come in large part from military contracts. James Castonguay
called meetings like this the "cultural production of the war on
terror." Numerous Hollywood productions and planned television
shows were altered or postponed after 9/11 because of government
concerns they would spark creative criminal imitation and intensify
public fears of future attacks. Causality is always a bit mixed up in
the blend of make-believe and reality.

The surveillant assemblages depicted in film and TV create another
source of fear in society -- the fear of all-encompassing 24/7
observation by unspecified others, usually the 'state', and the
subliminal belief that there must be some reason for all this
surveillance, some kind of danger out there against which we must be
protected.  This fear feeds social acceptance of the very
technological systems we ostensibly fear -- as well as the perceived
likelihood of criminal attacks against which they are arrayed.
Because films and TV offer popular culture's perceptions of crime and
terror, their visual and narrative messages -- and their strength --
are especially complex feeds to the war on terror."
(http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=518)


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]