
'''* Book: Surviving the Apocalypse in the Suburbs. The Thrivalist's Guide to Life Without Oil. by Wendy Brown'''

URL = http://www.newsociety.com/Books/S/Surviving-the-Apocalypse-in-the-Suburbs


=Description=


"In the latter half of the twentieth century, the percentage of the total American population living in suburbs grew to nearly 50 percent. Fossil fuels were cheap and plentiful, and car-dependent, energy-intensive lifestyles came hand-in-hand with this demographic transition. In the age of Peak Oil,environmental catastrophe and a failing economy it is imperative that we transform the suburbs into sustainable communities.

Surviving the Apocalypse in the Suburbs envisions a suburban evolution -- from isolated cookie-cutter houses with manicured lawns and 2-car garages to small, closely packed, productive, interdependent homesteads. Thisguide to simplifying suburbia and adopting a lower energy lifestyle breaks down all our basic needs and describes how they might be met after the loss of the modern conveniences we currently take for granted. From small-space gardening techniques and a guide to small livestock, to tips on cooking, heating, and sanitation options and much more, this is a complete guide to becoming more self-sufficient wherever you live.

Required reading for anyone interested in increased self-reliance and a lower carbon footprint, Surviving the Apocalypse in the Suburbs will help you look past the white picket fence to a new world of possibilities."


[[Category:Resilience]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Books]]