

=Source=

* Paper: Commons-based Peer-Production of Physical Goods. Is there Room for a Hybrid Innovation Ecology? By Peter Troxler, Square One, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

URL = http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Troxler-Paper.pdf 

Overview graphic: see also Figure 1: An attempt at mapping the Fabbing world, page 4 of the document


=Excerpt=

Peter Troxler:

"Balka et al. went to great length to collect examples of open source hardware projects through their site
http://open-innovation-projects.org/ which they then used as basis for their quantitative studies (2009,
2010). They find, ‘that, in open design communities, tangible objects can be developed in very similar
fashion to software; one could even say that people treat a design as source code to a physical object and
change the object via changing the source.’ (2009, p. 22), but also that that ‘open parts strategies in open
design are crafted at the component level, rather than the level of the entire design’ (2010, p. 11) and that
‘the degree of openness differs significantly between software and hardware components, in the sense that
software is more transparent, accessible, and replicable than hardware’ (ibid.).

Similarly, Torrone and Fried (2010) collected 13 examples of companies that are selling open source
hardware and creating some kind of community around them. Those companies together, the authors
estimate, generate a turnover of about US$ 50m. The authors reckon that there are currently about 200
open source hardware projects of this kind. They project the open source hardware community to reach
US$ 1b by 2015. Some of these communities have indeed seen an exponential growth recently, e.g. the
RepRap community (Rhys et al. 2010).

Next to these single-aim or single-product projects there are other initiatives promoting commons-based
peer production mainly through the sharing of designs and the stimulation of ‘making things’, be it for the
fun of it (e.g. the Maker Faire in the USA, the magazines Make or Craft), for easy sharing, distribution and
promotion (e.g. Ponoko, Shapeways, Thingiverse), or for the purpose of more serious or more ambitious
social experiments, such as the Open Source Ecology with their experimental facility Factor E Farm (Dolittle,
2008).

Finally, there are other initiatives of commons-based peer production that could be summarized under the
heading of ‘shared machine shops’ (Hess, 1979). These workshops are typically equipped with hand tools
and relatively inexpensive fabrication machines (e.g. laser cutter, router, 3D mills). Users produce two- and
three-dimensional things that once could only be made using equipment costing hundreds of thousands of
Euros. They use digital drawings and open-source software to control the machines, or they build electronic
circuits and gadgets.

Hackerspaces define themselves ‘as community-operated physical places, where people can meet and work
on their projects’ (Hackerspaces, 2010). Emerging from the counter culture movement (Grenzfurthner &
Schneider, 2009), they are ‘place[s] where people can learn about technology and science outside the
confines of work or school’ (Farr, 2009). Activities in hacker spaces evolve around computers and
technology, and digital or electronic art. Hackerspaces are founded as local initiatives following a common
pattern, becoming a hacker space is predominantly self declaratory. The Hackerspaces ecosystem comprises
some 400 member locations, of which roughly half are either dormant or under construction
(Hackerspaces, 2010a). Collaboration between Hackerspaces has recently begun in the shape of so called
‘hackatlons’ that seem not to extend beyond showing activity at the hacker spaces taking part
(Hackerspaces, 2010b).

100k-Garages is ‘is a community of workshops with digital fabrication tools for precisely cutting, machining,
drilling, or sculpting the parts for your project or product, in all kinds of materials, in a shop or garage near
you’ (100kGarages, 2010), supported by machine manufacturer ShopBot and the design sharing platform
Ponoko. Most of these workshops are located in the U.S.A. and Canada (about 180), with five shops in
Europe and two in Australia. As opposed to the other examples, 100k-Garages are providing a professional
manufacturing service, rather than offering shop access to makers.

TechShop is a group of workshops that are equipped with typical machine shop tools (welding stations,
laser cutters, milling machines) and corresponding design software. Access to the workshop is through
monthly or yearly membership, and courses on how to use the tools are offered, too. TechShop started in
the California Bay Area, and is present in five more cities around the U.S.A. (TechShop, 2010).
Fab Lab, short for fabrication laboratory, is another global initiative with a growing number of locations
around the world. Fab Labs are more conceptually rooted as they emerged from an MIT course entitled
‘How To Make (almost) Anything’ (Gershenfeld, 2005). While there is no formal procedure on how to
become a Fab Lab, the process is monitored by the MIT, and the MIT maintains a list of all Fab Labs
worldwide. At the moment of writing, the Fab Lab community comprises 45 labs, with another 45 to 50
labs to open in the not too distant future. There are a few collaborative projects within the community, and
a number of initiatives to exchange designs and experience between the labs. Similar to the hackatlons, but
on a more structural basis, all the labs around the world are in contact with each other through a common
video conferencing system hosted at the MIT which is used for ad-hoc meetings, scheduled conferences and
the delivery of the Fab Academy training programme.

In literature, there is a number of examples of Fab Lab projects. Mikhak et al. (2002) report on projects in
India, at Vigyan Ashram Fab Lab just outside the village of Pabal in Maharashtra, and at the Costa Rica
Institute of Technology in San Jose, Costa Rica. The India projects are about developing controller boards
to do more accurate timing of the diesel engines they use to generate electrical power, and developing
devices to monitor milk quality not at the collection centres and the processing plants, but at producer
level. The Costa Rican projects evolve around wireless sensing modules for agricultural, educational and
medical applications, for example the monitoring of a certain skin condition in a rural village.

Gershenfeld (2005) lists examples of what students at MIT made in his course ‘how to make (almost)
anything’, including a bag that collects and replays screams, a computer interface for parrots that can be
controlled by a bird's beak, a personalised bike frame, a cow-powered generator, an alarm clock that needs
to be wrestled to make it turn off, and a defensive dress that protects its wearer's personal space.
Gjengedal (2006) reports on the early projects at the Norwegian MIT Fab Lab at Solvik farm in Lyngen: the
‘electronic shepard’ (sic) project that used telecom equipment to track sheep in the mountains, the ‘helmet
wiper’ for clearing the face shield in the rain, the ‘wideband antenna’ for the industrial, scientific and
medical (ISM) radio band, and the , the ‘Internet 0’ project (a low bandwidth Internet protocol), the
‘perfect antenna’, and the ‘local position system’ for positioning of robots in the lab.

Pfeiffer (2009) describes her own experiments and projects in the context of distributed digital design; the
experiments being Lasercut News, Digital Color Studies & Pixilated Images, Lasercut Screen, and Lasercut
Bracelets (which she sold at a local shop), the projects: Distorted Chair and Asperatus Tile.

Hackerspaces, per their name and definition, build on commons-based principles. 100k-Garages and
TechShops use dedicated platforms to share (final) designs, yet their commitment to a commons-based
peer production philosophy seems to be somewhat weaker. Fab Labs’ commitment to some kind of
commons is more explicit. The Fab Charter, to which all Fab Labs subscribe, states, that ‘designs and
processes developed in fab labs must remain available for individual use although intellectual property can
be protected however you choose’. And the Charter continues ‘commercial activities can be incubated in
fab labs but they must not conflict with open access, they should grow beyond rather than within the lab,
and they are expected to benefit the inventors, labs, and networks that contribute to their success’ (Fab
Charter, 2007)."
(http://wikis.fu-berlin.de/download/attachments/59080767/Troxler-Paper.pdf)


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Peerproduction]]