

=Context=

Forrest Landry:

"rather than attempting to deal with the complexity 
of large scale groups directly, it is considered that 
sustainable group systems can be identified by 1) 
resolving a minimal abstract set of organizational concepts 
(one which would span the total space of all organizational 
systems) and 2) using those concepts to define the minimum 
possible structure necessary to create a sustainable group. 
Once the basic principles of long term group stability 
have been identified in their simplest 'ideal' form, the 
way is opened for the practical application of these ideals 
to real groups. 

In effect, it is considered that if any group can be made 
sustainable, that the dynamics of that group can be treated 
as a 'cell' and composed into larger groups which will also 
be sustainable (using the same techniques as that internal 
to the prototypical cell group itself).  Therefore, the 
issues associated with group scale can be factored out. 
This allows the consideration of sustainability to be applied 
to small groups (with minimum complexity) as if they are 
representative of all groups.  Of primary interest then is 
what sort of minimal organizational dynamics would enable 
any small group to be sustainable."

(https://mflb.com/civ_dev_1/sgrp_essay_3.html)



=Typology=

Forrest Landry:

"Coherency assumptions particular to small groups
For the purposes of this essay, some assumptions have been made
about the motivations of the individuals who choose to gather 
themselves into an intentional group.  Particularly, it is 
assumed that each member is motivated and enabled to achieve the 
benefits of combining their efforts with others in as positive 
and as natural a manner as possible.  By "enabled" it is meant 
that each member is sufficiently knowledgeable about themselves 
and each other to achieve the necessary alignment of personal 
intent in group action.  This is particularly apparent in situations 
where the group may be required to respond quickly and decisively 
to external situations.  For example, the members of a local fire 
department will need to trust one another and one another's real and 
embodied skills to effectively respond to the rapidly changing 
situation of a fire.  The strength of an emergency response group 
a group is largely dependent on the health of the members and such 
groups will particularly require strong interpersonal bonds and 
mutual trust between all members.  Although not all groups may 
need to be this obviously and rapidly responsive, the internal 
general structure of a generic group must have the capacity 
to support these capabilities (should need arise).  This need for 
capability sets a requirement on what group organization principles 
will ultimately be considered viable (more on this below). 

Also, it is assumed that the activities of the group are intended 
to be of mutual benefit to the membership, community, and larger 
world (ie, a criterion of sustainability).  Achieving these conditions 
is a precursor to group formation.  The means by which individuals 
can attain the sufficient level of personal health is beyond the 
scope of this essay.  However, insofar as the continued and 
sustained health of each member is especially important to the 
continuance and sustainability of the group itself, the ideas of 
an organizational principle of a group must itself be considered 
in terms of nurturing strength.  In particular, the best overall 
effectiveness of the group will occur when the relationships between 
members, and the feelings of each member about the group as a 
whole, are each nurturing of strength.  The degree to which the 
health and strength of the group is maintained is therefore also a 
basis for considering the effectiveness of a potential group 
organizational principle.  This can be thought of as also consistent 
with a notion of ethics which asserts a connection of the means by 
which something is achieved and the nature of the ends which are realized. 
For small groups just starting out, the focus of activity and intent 
for the group must therefore be on establishing and maintaining the 
emotional, intellectual, and communicative health of each member and 
of member interactions prior to the group having an overall externally 
coherent action or intent as a whole.  Small groups are therefore 
first defined in terms of inner growth before they can be self defined 
in terms of outer action and intent.


===Structural archtypes for group orginization===

In considering the many and various organizational models and principles
that have been previously used to coordinate all sorts of groups, 
a categorical analysis of the primary forms and structures will identify 
three basic and fundamental types of decision making process.  For the 
purposes of this essay, these three primary forms of decision making will 
be referred to as 'the democracy', 'the meritocracy', and 'the consensus'. 
(Note: These categories are known to be conceptually orthogonal insofar 
as other and more complex types of organization can be shown to be a 
scalar or linear superposition of these three basic types). 


The three notions of an organizing principle can be briefly described 
(in a characteristically simplified form) as follows: 

      
 * In a democracy, a range of possible options is reviewed, discussion 
      and persuasion (rhetoric) is followed by a vote, and the majority 
      decision applies to the whole. 

      
 * In a meritocracy, some process (it does not matter which), is used 
      to select a focus of decision making (a single person or smaller 
      group), which then (perhaps after listening to the considered 
      council of others) will make a decision which is applied to the 
      whole.  It is assumed that the whole will always and implicitly 
      trust the part to make decisions 'correctly' (whatever that notion 
      is taken to mean for the whole group). 

      
 * In consensus, all members sit in council together and discuss 
      potential decisions together until a complete and total agreement 
      is reached among all members (however long it takes) which then 
      becomes the decision of the group. 

Of these three basic types of organizing principle, smaller groups will 
generally be best organized using the method of consensus.  When first forming, 
consensus methods are the inherent default starting point for any group 
dynamic (at least insofar as each member is freely able to determine for 
themselves if they actually belong to the group).  Consensus decision 
making has significant advantages in regards to unity, integrity, and strength. 
Consensus, as a method of making group decisions, contributes to good feelings, 
clear intents, and insight on the part of each member.  In consensus, 
each person has the freedom of complete contribution and may participate 
fully in the total agreement.  It is important that each member has 
good feelings about the resulting decisions and a willingness to 
participate fully in the action of the whole, particularly since this 
has the effect of increasing the depth and the overall effectiveness of 
the group in any action actually performed.   The more whole and integral the group, 
and the better that each member feels about the others, the the stronger 
the group and the stronger and more generally beneficial the results. 
The sustainability of the outcome is in proportion to the strength and 
unity of the group.  Thus, to a first approximation, consensus 
is seen to contribute directly to group effectiveness. 

However, on deeper consideration it becomes apparent that each of 
these three organizing principles has some real disadvantages, and 
consensus is not excepted. "

(https://mflb.com/civ_dev_1/sgrp_essay_3.html)


=Discussion=

==Disadvantages (and advantages) of the group governance methods==

Forrest Landry:

"Consensus, although it usually achieves 
very high quality decisions, also takes the most time to implement. 
Consensus requires frequent, continued, and sustained interaction of 
the whole group.  Not all members may be as constantly and fully 
available for the necessary and ongoing interaction and communication 
that necessary for consensus decision making.  Even in the best of 
circumstances, it is often difficult to find and coordinate the 
necessary long meeting times inherent in the consensus process. 
Furthermore, in situations requiring immediate decisive action, 
(such as within the context of unexpected events and/or emergency), 
consensus is completely unable to mediate fast, vital, 
and necessary choice.  As such, consensus, although it is very strong 
in quality, is also the very weakest in the sense of being the least 
powerful (in quantity) of the three decision making methods summarized 
above.  While the group is microscopically coherent, it is in some cases 
macroscopically ineffective. 

In contrast to consensus, systems of meritocracy, such as those having 
a single person or small unit of people in some sort of hierarchical structure, 
are the most powerful.  Meritocratic organizations, particularly in a 
fast changing environment, are the most able to deal with situations requiring 
immediate and decisive action (for example, any situation involving emergency or 
danger).  Such organizations are generally flexible and are usually 
the most effective in implementing powerful action with the highest 
levels of effectiveness, due to their coordinated quality and 
their focused and singular purity of intent.  Both strength and 
flexibility are necessary for a group as a whole for it to remain 
sustainable. 

Unfortunately, as is well known, meritocratic systems, no matter how well 
intended, are also the most susceptible to unconstrained abuse (although 
powerful, meritocratic systems are infrequently also strong).  For a 
group to last in a changing environment (where the rate of change can 
sometimes be high) some element of meritocratic or executive organization 
is desirable and useful in any real group.  Yet, due to the potentiality 
for abuse the meritocratic method of organization is the also the most 
likely to develop seriously disabling aspects and painful effects 
for the group members.  Any occurrence of the negative aspects in 
a meritocratic organization can quickly diminish the overall effectiveness, 
health, and sustainability of a group due to less than committed component 
actions on the part of the members.  While the macroscopic aspects of 
the group are maintained, the microscopic aspects suffer.  Over time, 
these small scale instabilities can magnify into larger concerns that 
destabilize the group (coup events or other cancerous instabilities). 

In recognizing the marked disadvantages of the meritocracy, and as an 
attempt at moderating the demands for time and communication required 
by consensus, one might consider the method of democracy to be the best 
overall alternative.  In a democratic system, everyone gets 1) a chance 
to think about the issues, 2) the option to make their choice known 
(as selected from a fixed and finite set of options), and 3) a chance 
to convince others of the correctness of their viewpoints.  In this 
system, less in person and in council time and communication are 
required than that needed for consensus.  Democratic methods often 
appear simpler to define (in the short term at least), and the decisions 
made by the group are usually (seemingly) unambiguous (and therefore 
simpler to implement).  There is additionally a feeling of security and 
freedom to choose with ones heart when anonymity is used as part of the 
voting process.  Also, the democratic system overall tends to be much 
more resistant to overt abuse than a meritocracy.  Such a system, 
furthermore, is well suited to groups that cannot often meet or 
communicate directly, and which therefore must use some form of 
messaging.  Any group communication based primarily on messaging would 
be too cumbersome to use for consensus decision making, and too slow and 
dis-empowering for everyone when used as part of a meritocratic system. 

As such, the democratic system of organization seems initially to be a 
better balance of consensus, which makes decisions well (i.e., good 
quality of choice), and authority, which makes decisions fast (i.e., 
good quantity of choice).  Unfortunately, the democratic method of 
organization has significant flaws as well, particularly when applied 
to groups having a more familiar or tribal character. 

The process of voting requires that the issues be clear cut and 
partitionable into a finite set of specific options which can be 
voted on.  Unfortunately in life, most such issues are rarely so 
clear cut.  Real issues of value are often associated with various 
feelings, personal emotions, and subjective intuitions.  Further, 
insofar as creative decision making is about opening new potentialities 
and working with the unknown and unknowable, the attempt to reduce 
a problem to a finite set of specific options is very problematic. 
The reduction of a hard and subtle value problem into such a finite 
specificity as required for a vote must be regarded as being nearly 
antithetical to any possibility of success. 

Moreover, the process of choosing which options will be in the 
total set of available options to be voted on is an often neglected 
form of power which is frequently, but invisibly, abused in itself. 
The context of the choice to be made, and the context in which the 
choice is made, are themselves rarely the object of a democratic 
process (it is a problem of regress which can be diminished, but 
never completely and finitely resolved).  This covert shifting of 
context can be seen, for example, in the efforts of a used car 
salesman to enact the reality of one's primary choice as being 
between buying the red car or the blue one, whereas the real choice 
is whether or not to buy a vehicle at all.  Often, it is only in 
the action of shifting the context of choice that a real solution 
can be found.  The practice of democracy encourages a form of covert 
abuse in making it always necessary to choose from a finite set of 
options, whereas in real life, the number of options available is 
always infinite. 

To make matters worse, the action of the vote itself does little 
to create group cohesiveness, necessary to the long term sustainability 
of the group.  Majority rule, particularly if that majority is very 
slight (51%), is oppressive to the minority necessarily left remaining. 
The action of voting encourages a polarization, a schism of opinion, 
between two factions. Even though the schism incurred by the voting 
process is very obvious, the democratic method does not provide a means 
to heal that division; it is an unavoidable divisiveness created by the 
method itself. 

Meritocracy and consensus both tend to heal such schisms of opinion 
either through insight (the creation of a third additional option) 
or through negotiation. Divisiveness is an especially problematic 
element of democratic process in that it diminishes the unity of feeling 
in a group.  The larger and lasting benefit of group action is in 
geometric (or stronger) proportion a total coherency of group consciousness 
operating as one together.  Two members working together can be much 
stronger than having both work alone, yet the democratic method nearly 
always splits a group into at least two disagreeing fractions, those for 
and those against. By encouraging a false simplicity, much clarity and 
depth of action is lost (creativity, spirituality, and awareness are 
best enabled by clarity). 

Furthermore, the minority must always feel unhappy with the 'group' 
decision, the outcome of the vote when they are forced to accept the 
'will of the whole'.  Members losing the vote must necessarily override 
their own feelings and opinions.  Democracy encourages a suppression of 
feeling; an action for the 'right' to have a vote, a fleeting voice, 
in the decision at all (a voice, moreover, that is often reduced to 
insignificance and meaninglessness in even moderately large groups). 
Choice (and significance) is inherent in consciousness, at all levels 
of being.  It is not 'licensed' from the whole to the part, or even 
from the part to the whole. To make choice seem to be a temporary and 
possibly revocable 'right' (for which one must barter their 
unconditional acceptance of the unconscious tyranny of the majority, as 
the democratic system must make it seem), is to act in a manner contrary 
to fundamental truths of life itself: the true ownership of one's own 
choices, the significance and meaningfulness of all choosing, and the 
cooperative process by which all choice IS made.  In its worst forms, 
democracy becomes a process antithetical to the dynamics of life, having 
more the nature of a cancer than of a living being working as a unity 
(and there are yet deeper layers of symbolism in this, for those who 
have the eyes to see it!).  To have an action or a process be contrary 
to life is to go directly against the interests of the group itself. 

Worse still, the dialog that precedes the vote is itself subtly 
flawed and distorted.  In that a vote is an event, the timing of 
which is always finite and near, it encourages the action of speaking 
rather than of listening, expressing rather than accepting.  In fixing 
the time of a vote, communication becomes rushed and is soon replaced 
by lecture and campaign.  Busy activity replaces the reflective space 
necessary for insight, creativity, and the more inward forms of 
communication inherent in the process of attaining truly effective 
decisions. 

Also, in being only about expression, the dialog presented before 
the vote (ideally) would consist of (or have the form of, or at 
least appear to be) reasonable arguments which are impersonal, 
objective, and based only on logic and facts.  Yet such dialog must 
always have the implicit objective, form, and purpose of convincing 
others to vote in the same manner as oneself.  In that such expression 
must therefore hide one's own personal subjective values and natural 
desires (which ultimately can have no logical or reasonable basis) 
within arguments which are designed to appear to be based on 
impersonal objectivity and reason, the ideal dialog before the vote 
is inherently deceptive.  In this, artfully constructed fictions 
replace actual fact; reactions to images, symbols, and flags are used 
to replace feelings of inner truth with emotions of fear and pride. 
The ideal of democracy becomes only an expression of rhetoric before 
the vote, a means of manipulation which justified in the terms of the 
end of having others vote (or act) in some limited manner.  Rhetoric 
cannot be trusted, even and especially when it appears to be 
trustworthy. In that a group is inherently based on mutual regard and 
trust, a transparent, considered, and conscious communication is 
necessary for effectiveness. 

To use rhetoric to encourage others to replace their thoughts with 
those of the speaker, is in effect, to treat them as a machine, to 
inherently regard them less intelligent and significant than oneself. 
In this, concerns about the outcome of the vote override all concerns 
for the people participating.  As a result, everyone (including the 
"winners") feel like they have lost something important, some element 
of truth and honor has been neglected.  Inwardly everyone knows 
intuitively that the means used (deception and control of the vote) 
cannot ever be justified in the terms of the ends, no matter how well 
intentioned ("for the good of all").  One cannot value people and their 
lives (life) by attempting to treat them (and all of nature) in the 
manner of an ignorant and discardable machine.  Insofar as the group 
values sustainability and life, these intents values must also be 
reflected as an aspect of its practice, its realization, and its identity. 

As such, the practice of democracy, and the politics it implies, 
is by its very nature very disabling to the sustainability of a 
small group.   The methods of 
democracy strongly discourage participants from ever considering 
matters of personal feeling and intuition in a natural manner. 
The process of campaign is an invasive intrusion into one's own 
inner dynamics of creativity; an evolution which is very necessary 
when choosing with an alignment with the inner nature of life.  While an 
authoritarian meritocracy has features that lend themselves to an 
easy and overt abuse, a democracy is not much better in that it 
lends itself to a covert abuse. 
Yet, as has been described, neither consensus nor merit, as 
potential methods for organizing a group, are ideal either.  All 
three methods when practiced by themselves are inherently flawed 
when considered in terms of the requirements of sustainable 
group process. 

Therefore, it is necessary to develop some other, alternate method 
for organizing a groups which somehow combine the good effects of the 
values of consensus decision making with power and decisiveness of 
meritocratic methods.  Ideally, the alternative must 
not introduce the known disabling effects associated with democracy, 
merit, or consensus.  What is needed is a method for combining into 
a new hybrid the high quality aspects of consensus decision making 
with the high quantity of decision available from a meritocracy, 
without introducing new disadvantages and potentials for abuse 
inherent in each of these other forms.  In answer to this, this 
essay will therefore consider an alternate method of combination 
these forms to create a hybrid small group organization principle."

(https://mflb.com/civ_dev_1/sgrp_essay_3.html)


==The Proposed Hybrid Alternative: the 'Small Group Method'==

Forrest Landry:

"In summary then, there are only three basic methods by which group 
decisions are made.  Each of these methods can be used to make two 
different kinds of decisions, one particular to its own modality, and 
one to act as a check on (to moderate the effects of) each of the 
other two methods of decision making.  Each decision making methodology 
has two primary responsibilities, and all three methods together 
account for all (six) basic aspects of group management.  This overall 
arrangement can be restated more compactly and symmetrically as follows: 

      That Consensus process, which is based on the total and heartfelt 
      agreement of all members of the group, is used to make 
      1) all of the important decisions about the being, nature, 
      and intent of the group and its actions, and 2) selecting 
      single individuals to act as a coordinating and decision 
      making focus each particular action, and the group member 
      who will be responsible for facilitating the next consensus 
      decision making meeting of the group (note different people 
      may be chosen for each role). 

      That Executive process, which is based only on the merit and authority 
      of the selected focus person, is used to make decisions about 
      1) the implementation of a specific group external action, and 
      2) how to best enable the consensus decision making 
      process during a group meeting. 

      That Democratic process, which is based on a spontaneous majority 
      vote of those present in any gathering of the group, is used 
      to make only two kinds of decisions: 1) whether to immediately 
      suspend the currently pending executive process (i.e., to 
      indefinitely suspend the authority of the currently acting 
      focus person) and return directly to a consensus decision 
      making process, and/or 2) whether to immediately suspend the 
      currently pending consensus decision making process, with 
      respect to a particular stalled decision.  (Note; In effect, 
      the latter aspect is a transition to a type of executive 
      process, usually to select a focus person who will ensure 
      that the issue is taken up at some (other) future scheduled 
      meeting, or suspended by vote again, if the situation warrants. 
      It is important to let the stalled decision rest for the 
      remainder of the current meeting, so that other issues can be 
      discussed if needed). 

Aside from its simplicity, this hybridization has numerous advantages 
for a small group.  Consensus process is used to make all of 
the important decisions which affect the group as a whole.  Consensus 
decision making serves as the foundation for all group activities and 
allows each of the group members to come to know one another more 
deeply.  As such, consensus decision making allows the group as a whole 
to come to one mind about an issue.  In sharing insights each person may 
more easily come to feel good about the decisions that are made.  This 
enables the group to be whole, and acting as a whole, to be strong, 
and thus enabled to work in a healthy and sustainable manner.  Overall, 
the consensus process 
provides the group with the ability to make high quality decisions in 
the places where high quality choices are most needed.  By allowing for 
transition to executive process, the cumbersome aspects of consensus 
decision making are avoided.  By allowing supercession by democratic 
process, a stuck or blocked consensus process can be prevented from 
halting or freezing the group, ensuring that the group as a whole will 
remain responsive, effective, and at peace with itself. 

Executive process allows for the group to have the necessary 
structured organization, responsiveness, and flexibility needed 
to cope with the vast number of details of rapidly changing conditions 
associated with the external environment (and the unexpected dynamics of life). 
Executive process also provides the context and facilitating basis for effective 
consensus decision making within a group.  Overall, the executive 
process provides the group with the ability to make rapid and numerous 
decisions in the situations where immediacy and decisiveness is most 
needed.  By allowing supercession by the democratic process, the 
executive process can be prevented from becoming dominating, or misused, 
ensuring that the group remains healthy. 

Democratic process ensures that neither the consensus process nor 
the executive process ever becomes disabling.  By ensuring that there 
is always a method for checking or relieving problematic situations 
(such as halted or overly contentious group meetings and possible abuses 
of focus authority), these other two forms of decision making are made 
more sure and secure and the problems of rhetoric and loss of essence 
associated with democratic process are avoided. 

Overall, by maintaining a good balance and mixture of these three 
types of decision making processes, the membership of a group should 
be able to integrate in a healthy manner with the strength and 
flexibility necessary for high quality combined works.  The 
particular disadvantages of each type of decision making process are 
offset by a balanced transition to the advantages of each of the other 
types.  In this way, the best of all possible groups can be realized."

(https://mflb.com/civ_dev_1/sgrp_essay_3.html)

[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Governance]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Democracy]]