'''= Sustainable Pangea is a mapping project. We focus on sustainable initiatives, all best practices, and the social technologies they implement.'''

URL = http://www.sustainable-pangea.org [http://pangeasostenible.org/ Spanish-language map)


=Description=

Felipe Zalamea:

"In recent years, a human-centred paradigm has emerged from grassroots organisations, local communities and social entrepreneurs throughout the world, particularly in Latin America. While economic growth benefits only a select few, these social agents seek to implement bottom-up projects that address structural problems and improve the living standards of the populations involved. 

Empowered communities are meeting their needs without Government band-aid policies or foreign aid. Sustainable Pangea is mapping best practices of such communities and documents on how their social technologies contribute to implement sustainability worldwide. In the web-platform there are articles, a virtual map, pictures, links and information on initiatives within four categories: Solidarity Finance, Organic Agriculture, Fair Trade and Community-based Tourism.

Sustainable Pangea gives visibility to social entrepreneurs and local communities leading sustainable initiatives, while identifying their contributions to society and collecting information on social technologies and popular know-how used in their application. In the long-term, it aims to become an insightful and quality-controlled pool of social ideas, technologies and projects, acting as a bridge between social entrepreneurs and potential investors or donors.
To finance this work, they founded Sumak Travel (http://www.sumak-travel.org), a social enterprise striving to deliver rewarding, ethical holidays for the more discerning travellers. Sumak Travel is a tour operator selling community-based eco-tourism  trips, working directly with community-based tour operators in Latin America. 

Thanks to its cost-efficient structure, it offers affordable trips and maximises the amount of money going straight to the local communities. It is a complementary source of income that they use to improve their standard of living and to preserve their culture and environment. To sum it up: this is the polar opposite of mass tourism.

Sumak Kawsay means “good living” in Quechua. It proposes a human centred model for development which has been embraced by indigenous peoples in Latin America over the last two decades. Sumak Kawsay embodies ideas of caring for people, cultures and nature; principles that are key to true, sustainable development.

Sumak Travel, or “good, sustainable travel”, is a social enterprise that puts local communities and the environment at the centre of the model."


=Projects=

* Prainha do Canto Verde, http://en.pangeasostenible.org/2012/01/prainha-do-canto-verde-ceara-brazil/ On the North-East coast of Brazil, a community of artisan fishermen have made inlays into community-based tourism.

* Study for Habitat Improvement Workshop, http://en.pangeasostenible.org/2012/01/study-for-habitat-improvement-workshop-paraguay/ Permanent social irrigation technology for peasant farmers and indigenous communities in Paraguay.

* The Working World, http://en.pangeasostenible.org/2012/01/la-base-buenos-aires-argentina/ Solidarity based finance working for recovered enterprises and cooperatives in Buenos Aires (Argentina).


=More Information=

More info via 	 

#Felipe Zalamea i.e. fzalamea in gmail
#info@sumak-travel.org


[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Spain]]

[[Category:Movements]]