
URL = http://sustainablebiodieselalliance.com/


=Description=


"The Sustainable Biodiesel Alliance (SBA) was founded in December 2006 by biodiesel pioneer Kelly King, activist Annie Nelson and film maker Daryl Hannah. Since then, the SBA has grown to include family farmers and farm organizations such as Farm Aid, the Institute for Agriculture Trade and Policy (IATP), members of the 25 x 25 coalition, environmental organizations including the EPA and NREL, renewable energy experts and NGO’s and university programs across the country. The SBA addresses issues concerning the sustainability of the U.S. biodiesel Industry through three initiatives. The primary mission of the Sustainable Biodiesel Alliance is the completion of an independent sustainability certification system for U.S. Biodiesel Feedstock, Production, Distribution and end use fuel. SBA programs also focus on educating the public on the values of community-based biodiesel systems and how local, sustainable biodiesel can help the U.S. move towards energy, economic and environmental security. Third, the Sustainable Biodiesel Alliance provides tools for sustainability to biodiesel consumers and the biodiesel industry through our website and membership. By working with biodiesel consumers and the biodiesel industry, and promoting the value of sustainable community-based systems,the SBA is bringing people together to build a sustainable energy future that benefits all sectors of society. The Sustainable Biodiesel Alliance relies on the hard work and dedication of our working Board of Directors, the SBA Staff and the expertise of the SBA Advisory Council to achieve the goals of the organization. These dedicated and driven individuals come from all areas of the industry and each contribute unique and valuable skills to the mission of the SBA."
(http://sustainablebiodieselalliance.com/dev/about.shtml)


[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Movements]]