
* Book: Sara Parkin. The Positive Deviant:  Sustainability Leadership in a Perverse World. 2010


=Description=

"The book is about how to exercise leadership for sustainability ‘despite being surrounded by the wrong institutional structures, the wrong processes and stubbornly uncooperative people’.  Sara outlined what she thinks constitutes ’sustainability’, the barriers to our taking it seriously, and what can be done in response."


=Discussion=

Summary of a talk by Sara Parkin:

"We have developed an economy that relies on growing the throughput of resources.  Whether capitalism or socialism, the system still relies on consumption.  As economist Herman Daly puts it, the world has become full up with us and our stuff.  The human economy outlined by Adam Smith and the biogeochemical economy of his friend James Hutton, two prominent Enlightenment Scots, have been developed separately rather than together and neither now relates to real people.  This split is entrenched in minds, in government structures, in the remits of NGOs.

What we need, Sara argues, is not ‘three legs, or three circles, or three bottom lines’ (social, economic, environmental) but new institutions and ‘mental kit’ able to deal with all three together at the same time.

We know what to do.  But as Kofi Annan put it:  we have a crisis of implementation.  How therefore can we make the change?

Sara urged more attention to words and concepts.  Sustainability has come to mean only the environment.  That is not true, and ‘the green movement deserves to be taken to the stocks for allowing it to become so’.

‘Capital’ does not only mean financial capital - the ‘five capitals’ framework also includes social, human, natural and manufactured capital.  We should run the economy to increase the stock of these other capitals that have been diminished.  This is the basis for ‘reconciliation economics’.

Another necessary shift, that Sara’s masters students undergo naturally, is to stop blaming ‘them’ and to recognise that there is only us.  Sara spoke (metaphorically) of ’sheep dipping everybody’; no-one should leave education without being ’sustainability literate’.  But the shift is about values too.  Susan Nieman argues for moral clarity; if there is a gap between the way things are now and where they should be, only we can bridge it - by doing the right thing.

For Sara, leadership is the key.  Leaders and ideas matter.  But leadership is not about roles:  it is a quality, a capacity, and we all need to develop it.  There is an ‘astonishing intellectual bankruptcy’ on both the left and the right in politics.  The shift in thinking cannot be found by harking back to the past, or looking for compromise.  We need to get to a place where we can make a sustainability and environmental case for doing business, not vice versa.


This passionate plea invited some thoughtful observations:

* it seems that eg renewable energy is drawing more women into engineering.  Certainly women seem to be making choices about where they work and what they work on that are in tune with their values.  Which is one of the reasons why they do not go into politics:  Green MP Caroline Lucas is campaigning for House of Commons reform for that reason;
    
* looking at stocks of the five capitals retrospectively over the past 100 years would paint a rather different picture of the distribution of wealth.  The Sarkozy Commission was smart in splitting measures into those needed to sustain the family today and those needed to sustain that lifestyle over time.  There is lots of ‘alternative measures of wellbeing’ work now under way;
    
* the battle over values is intense. The ethos of the competitive, marketing, status-driven consumer culture is everywhere. The goal is to keep us unsatisfied in order to feed further consumption, politics goes along with the same dynamic, and even NGOs and charities slip into playing the same game (see the recent Common Cause report urging NGOs to live up to their values and Jonathon Porritt’s blog about the failure of NGOs to mount a campaign against the government selling off the forests);
    
* the metaphor of ’sheep dip’ has unfortunate connotations.  Is there not a more loving and humane way of moving towards a common understanding of the issues and what is at stake?  Working with ‘coalitions of the willing’ is a good place to start, but sooner or later we need to engage in an open dialogue with those who disagree with us (Hume:  truth is arrived at through disagreement between friends);
    
* the challenge in sustainability is intangibility.  It is a silent and invisible threat.  Shifting a culture of health and safety such that everyone takes responsibility is possible, by contrast, partly because accidents are so obvious.  There may be a risk that elevating sustainability to a set of principles about how to run the whole system makes it even less tangible for individuals.  Better to allow the movement to fragment and just work on what it can get done (let the Green movement concentrate on global warming, while others tackle poverty etc).  Answer:  yes - but that approach has not got us very far so far, and time is running out;
    
* some big corporations appear to be taking sustainability seriously, eg the Unilever Sustainable Living Plan.  Is that good news, or does the sustainability movement view it as a cynical ploy?  Answer:  it is a step in the right direction.  They are challenging themselves to double sales while halving environmental impact.  The halving of impact is great - but doubling sales is not going to stop us ‘filling up the world’!"
(http://www.internationalfuturesforum.com/iffblog/?p=687)



[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Books]]