
'''= "aims to develop and promote a positive and compelling vision for a transformed global climate governance"'''

URL = https://en.taejaefci.org/


=Description=

"The '''Taejae Future Consensus Institute'''’s Sustainability for Planetary Commons Project (SPCP) aims to develop and
promote a positive and compelling vision for a transformed global climate governance that results
addressing the root causes of Earth system change with transformations to sustainable and just societies.

A ‘polycentric’ architecture that would distribute
responsibilities for prevention and impact governance across multiple sites and scales of action, and
attend to linkages, coordination and effective information flows between different actors and
institutions, is the appropriate model for governance (Global Tipping Points Report, 2023).


To achieve this, the feasible and effective initiatives are needed in three categories: 

1) [Global-scale] designing the governance of planetary commons, 

2) [Local-scale] downscaling and democratization of planetary commons, and 

3) [Private sector] restructuring of industries in sustainability.


=Characteristics=

Questions addressed by the SPCP are:

==Variable 1: Institutionalization of the planetary commons==

o What are the key components that should be considered when designing the governance
of planetary commons and Earth System Tipping Points (ESTPs)?

 Critical elements of the planetary commons concern all major Earth system spheres
(e.g., atmosphere, oceans, land, and cryosphere) with which the biosphere (humans
included) interact. If so, how?

o How can the planetary boundaries be institutionalized?


==Variable 2: Planetary nexus governance==

o What are the available options to reform the governance at the global-scale?

 Existing institutions

 Can and should the position of UNEP be upgraded to a ‘World Environment
Organization’ to adopt governance of planetary commons?

 Can and should the UN trusteeship council be upgraded?

 How can coalitions such as “Climate Club” be utilized to adopt planetary nexus
governance framework?


==New Initiatives==

 What are the action plans to create a supranational organization which can enforce
non-negotiable legally binding mechanisms to the member states?

 What is the prospect of adopting the ‘planetary integrity’ as the foundational principle
of the organization? (e.g. global environmental constitution: the world charter for nature, the Earth Charter
and the IUCN Draft International Convenant on Environment and Development)

o Among these options, which is the most effective and feasible solution? What action plans are needed to implement this solution into a reality?"

(https://en.taejaefci.org/)

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:South Korea]]