
'''* Report: 2002 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines. Global Reporting Initiative, 2002'''

URL = http://www.epeat.net/documents/EPEATreferences/GRIguidelines.pdf

=Description=

"The Board of Directors of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) is pleased to release the
2002 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines. This event marks a major milestone in the evolution
of GRI both as an institution and as a reporting framework. From an institutional
perspective, it marks the beginning of the first cycle of release, testing, review, and revision
under GRI’s new governance structure. From a reporting perspective, the 2002
Guidelinesrepresent the culmination of two years of revisions work involving hundreds
of individuals, as well as a significant advancement in rigour and quality relative to the
June 2000 Guidelines. The GRI Board recognises that this remains “work in progress”.

GRI is a living process that operates in the spirit of “learning by doing”. We are convinced
that the lessons gained from using the Guidelines are the best compass for guiding
ongoing improvement.

The GRI was launched in 1997 as a joint initiative of the U.S. non-governmental organisation
Coalition for Environmentally Responsible Economies (CERES) and United
Nations Environment Programme with the goal of enhancing the quality, rigour, and
utility of sustainability reporting. The initiative has enjoyed the active support and
engagement of representatives from business, non-profit advocacy groups, accounting
bodies, investor organisations, trade unions, and many more. Together, these different
constituencies have worked to build a consensus around a set of reporting guidelines
with the aim of achieving worldwide acceptance.

The first set of GRI Sustainability Reporting Guidelines appeared as an Exposure Draft in
1999. Following testing and public comment, the GRI released the June 2000
Guidelines. A revision process began immediately and continued over the next two years,
culminating in the work of the past six months. The process has benefited from extensive
public comment from stakeholders worldwide. Every comment was carefully
considered and a deliberate choice was made on which to incorporate. We recognise
that not all suggestions were integrated into the new Guidelines but we strongly encourage
continued engagement from all parties during the next cycle of revisions.
GRI recognises that developing a globally accepted reporting framework is a long-term
endeavour. In comparison, financial reporting is well over half a century old and still
evolving amidst increasing public attention and scrutiny. The 2002 Guidelines represent
the GRI Board’s view of a consensus on a reporting framework at this point in time
that is a blend of a diverse range of perspectives.

There are numerous ways to use the 2002 Guidelines. An organisation may choose to
simply use them for informal reference or to apply the Guidelines in an incremental
fashion. Alternatively, an organisation may decide to report based on the more demanding
level of “in accordance”. This level of reporting relies on transparency to balance
the need for flexibility in reporting with the goal of enhancing comparability across
reporters. GRI welcomes all reporting organisations—whether beginners or advanced—
as users of the Guidelines."

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]