'''* Project: Sustainable Prosperity, made in Europe''' 

URL = https://sustainable-prosperity.eu/

=Description=

"The purpose of this project is as easily stated as the task at hand is challenging: facilitating sustainable prosperity in Europe. Currently, economic growth is at the centre of European policy-making. Growth seemingly represents an essential condition for maintaining economic and political stability. It is also the root cause why policy today focuses mainly on efficiency improvements and the circular economy when it comes to tackling climate change.

To achieve sustainable prosperity, it is therefore crucial to liberate economic and political stability from the need of continous economic growth. Only then will it be possible to move beyond economic growth as a policy goal and put environmental and social considerations at the heart of European policy-making. In this sense, the ‘Policy-making Beyond Growth’ project seeks to raise awareness of growth dependencies among decision-makers and offer scientifically informed guidance for political action. By doing so, the project paves the way for sustainable prosperity in Europe.

The ‘Policy-making Beyond Growth’ project comprises several interconnected pillars. In the course of the project phase, co-creative policy labs and workshops with members of EU policy and academia were organised. Based on these, policy objectives, channels and concrete instruments were developed and compiled to address the problem of growth constraints and achieve sustainable prosperity in Europe. Furthermore, a European network of important actors and policymakers was identified to create a productive exchange and to bundle the potential and possibilities for socio-ecological transformation.

This website presents the results and key findings of the project, making them freely available. Most importantly, it provides a comprehensive synthesis of existing growth dependencies as well as an instructive overview on policy instruments to reduce those dependencies."
(https://sustainable-prosperity.eu/about/)

=More information=

* ZOE, the [[Institute for Future-Fit Economies]], is an independent think and do tank for new economic thinking and policy-making.

[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Europe]]