'''= SELC aims to help social enterprises, worker-owned co-ops, and other mission-oriented enterprises sort through legal red tape.''' 

URL = http://www.sustainableeconomieslawcenter.org/ [http://commonstransition.org/portfolio/sustainable-economies-law-center/]

=Mission=

SELC cultivates a new legal landscape that supports community resilience and grassroots economic empowerment. We provide essential legal tools so communities everywhere can develop their own sustainable sources of food, housing, energy, jobs, and other vital aspects of a thriving community.

=How we create change=

'''Neither our communities nor our ecosystems are well served by an economic system that incentivizes perpetual growth, wealth concentration, and the exploitation of land and people.'''

Communities everywhere are responding to these converging economic and ecological crises with a grassroots transformation of our economy that is rapidly re-localizing production, reducing resource consumption, and rebuilding the relationships that make our communities thrive.

However, as new solutions for resilience emerge, many are running into entrenched legal barriers: laws originally designed to protect people from the ills of industrialism are now preventing many communities from growing and selling their own food, investing in local businesses, creating sustainable housing options, and cooperatively owning land and businesses.

SELC exists to bridge the gap in legal expertise needed to transition from destructive economic systems to innovative and cooperative alternatives. Our 10 programs work together in identifying key leverage points in our existing economic and legal systems, removing strategic legal barriers, and creating replicable models for community resilience. We work to:

* Envision more just and resilient economic and legal systems;
* Identify and advocate for public policies that remove legal barriers to resilient communities while maintaining and strengthening worker, consumer and environmental protections;
* Empower community-based entrepreneurs and innovators to create replicable legal structures that will form the blueprints of the new economy;
* Educate communities and law-makers about the potential of new economic strategies; and
* Train the next generation of community-based lawyers to meet the burgeoning legal needs of resilient communities everywhere.

=New Economy in practice=

Part of SELC’s approach in catalyzing a more just and resilient society is to be the change we want to see. SELC has adopted policies that distribute “ownership” throughout the organization, allow for more dignified livelihoods, expand access to our legal services, and empower a new generation of grassroots legal experts. These policies include:

* '''An equal and capped pay rate''': Every member of our organization is compensated equally for their work – whether an attorney or not. That salary is based on two objective measures of our local economy – the average Oakland income and a regional living wage indicator calculated by the Economic Policy Institute.
* '''Cooperative governance:''' We take pride in our ability to get a lot done, and we credit much of our efficiency to the implementation of a highly structured system of distributed decision-making. Each program is run by a semi-autonomous circle of staff and volunteers, nested within larger circles of accountability. Our decision-making processes enable each staff member to propose projects and take significant leadership roles, optimizing individual autonomy and collective responsibility.
=Interview=

Jane Orsi interviewed by Shareable magazine:


'''"Bernice Yeung: What is sustainable economies law? Why did you create a center on this topic?'''

Janelle Orsi: Jenny Kassan and I founded SELC so we could start to enable a different kind of economy. The economy that we envisioned is not so much based on traditional buying and selling and the owning of things, but more on new kinds of transactions like sharing and barter, exchange, cooperative ownership, systems of borrowing, and lending of goods. These are things that — because people are not used to doing them and they're not a part of our normal livelihoods — the legal system is not set up for them, and there are a realm of unanswered questions.


'''BY: What is SELC currently working on?'''

JO: We now have four law-student interns with us all summer and we are doing a few different things. We're creating a library of resources for urban agriculture, and answering common legal questions for people doing urban ag — for example, how to get land, how to overcome zoning barriers, how to deal with liability issues and insurance, whether there can be property tax incentives for growing in urban areas, how you can sell food you grow in your yard, how a for-profit urban farm can use volunteer labor because they often do but it often violates labor law. We've taken on a few clients, and a handful of organizations that do urban farming have come in for consultations.


'''BY: What other issues does SELC work on?'''

JO: We have five programs. Another program involves helping set up worker-owned cooperatives. We also have a program called Community-Supported Entrepreneurship that deals with questions like, "How can a small, local business finance themselves using local resources rather than venture capitalism or angel investors?" We are creating a FAQ about how to raise money creatively for a small business, and we are looking into ways that businesses can raise money using gift certificates, or through a subscription to a farmer's season of harvest, to use an urban ag example.

One thing that Jenny and the interns did is write a letter to the Securities and Exchange Commission requesting an exemption from securities laws for investments under $100. So say I wanted to start a coffee shop and I need $20,000 to get it going, I could put the word out on the Internet or through friends to get 200 people to invest $100. If the SEC responds positively to our letter and allows small businesses to get small investments, it could revolutionize how businesses raise money. And the people who provide the funding would become investors and own a piece of the business; they would have some equity in it. Right now, there are very few exceptions that allow people to raise money in that way and in order to do it, you have to go through a huge compliance hurdle that involves lots of disclosures, and which costs a lot of money.

The fourth program deals with local currencies and barter. We're creating a how-to guide to bartering because there are two legal issues. One is tax issues, and knowing when you are and are not obligated to pay taxes on a barter transaction. We're trying to develop guidelines for that. The other legal issue is employment laws. If, for example, you work in exchange for food, then under typical labor and employment laws, you are technically considered an employee, even if you do it voluntarily. The farm owner could be on the hook for not following employment laws.

We are also dealing with a gigantic question around local currencies and how to regulate them. We have a client, Davis Dollars, where they've printed local currency for the city of Davis, and they've gotten businesses on board with accepting it. This gives people an incentive to spend locally and they make the local currency cheaper than cash, so $10 Davis Dollars costs $9.50. They are putting more money in circulation in a small way. There are different legal issues — whether the administrators qualify for tax exemption because they would like to be a nonprofit, and whether this organization is technically a bank and should be regulated like a bank. We are doing a survey of how currencies around the world are structured and how they comply with regulations. We haven't really found a good model yet for a local currency system. This is a huge area that needs a lot of attention.

Our fifth program relates to housing. We call it the Shared, Sustainable, and Slow Housing program, and we want to create more resources to help develop affordable housing and create shared housing arrangements. Hopefully, we can create a resource library on shared housing."
(http://shareable.net/blog/how-lawyers-can-help-us-to-share)


=More Information=

* [[Cooperative Development Services]]


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Licensing]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category: Open Company Formats]]