

=Description=

"Can we develop a different future for our country as the exodus, poverty and overexploitation? 

Can we dream of a healthy and lasting diet in the cities, in agreement with the harmonious development of territories and producers?

Are we capable of inventing new ways of managing our natural resources and land and adapt them to the challenges of the 21st century? 

Can we still act for countries with peasants, mountains with mountain people and a coastline with artisanal fishermen?

To meet these challenges, a growing number of social organizations, NGOs, figures, researchers, farmers and fishermen weave since 1993 the international alliance Sustainable Earth. 

This alliance aims not only to act from local, but also bring a significant number of initiatives and proposals at the international level.

Sustainable Earth is an informal alliance, made up of individuals and organizations with a with a willingness to work as big as the challenges they face. These men and women together built synergies, a relationship of trust and concrete initiatives.

Pierre Vuarin (FPH) is one of the co-founders and leaders.

Charles Leopold Mayer Foundation participates in the financing of the Sustainable Earth Alliance. Through its numerous activities that address global challenges, as well as its approach to international work, the Charles Leopold Mayer Foundation offers to allies of the Sustainable Earth Alliance the opportunity of extensive collaboration. It also provides new research issues, new important collective management tools (Coredem, conceptual mapping, etc.).. In the same way, Sustainable Earth Alliance allies contribute to the creation and improvement of tools, knowledge creation and generating collective action."
(http://www.terre-citoyenne.org/en/the-sustainable-earth-alliance/about-us.html)


=History=

The origin of this alliance comes from the "APM Program - Peasant agricultures and globalisation" initiated by the Charles Leopold Mayer Foundation for Human Progress - FPH - in 1993. In 2003, the association between APM network members and new organizations like the World Mountain People Association, the World Forum of Fishermen, Alimenterra, ADEPA, etc. .. was born Terre Citoyenne (Sustainable Earth Alliance)." 


 
=Characteristics=

"The Sustainable Earth alliance has three fundamental characteristics:

It operates on several levels developing networks to strengthen local capacity for action at the international level.

It is a open work space, international, which reconstructs according to the opportunities and synergies among the allies, and promotes the reflexive work and the collaborative capacity.
It is a multi-stakeholder process which aims to integrate diverse views (producers, consumers, intermediaries) on specific or general issues (food, fishing, agriculture, territories, natural resources, governance, etc.)"
(http://www.terre-citoyenne.org/en/the-sustainable-earth-alliance/about-us.html)

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]