
'''= "SWAN is a self-organizing network of individuals and local organizations committed to social justice and ecological regeneration, based on [[Doughnut Economics]]".''' [https://doughnuteconomics.org/stories/bringing-doughnut-economics-to-a-bioregion]

URL = 

''"The Swannanoa River watershed is in the beautiful mountains and valleys of western North Carolina, USA." (includes Asheville, NC)''


=Description=

SWAN:

"SWAN has hosted speakers of several local organizations in its weekly meetings including groups promoting permaculture and home food gardens, offering food to those in need, and petitioning the county government for affordable housing from tourism taxes.

One SWAN member who is a professional group facilitator helps SWAN plan each quarter using the methods of the Technology of Participation (ToP.) 

Our members carry out cleanups of the Swannanoa River, sometimes around homeless settlements, and enjoy an occasional river float with family members. Recently, a field trip of SWAN members was held at Veterans’ Park alongside the river. Regularly, one member speaks at county meetings about rainwater runoff, and other issues. We have also given our input in the Buncombe County 2043 plan.

In terms of social outreach about Doughnut Economics and the watershed, SWAN members have been interviewed on radio, podcasts, and in conferences on Zoom, posted about SWAN on social media, arranged articles about SWAN and Doughnut Economics in a local newspaper and newsletter, prepared SWAN flyers, created a Facebook group, a Google group, and a Notion website, and recently created a SWAN exhibit in the local Earth Day celebration at Lake Tomahawk in Black Mountain. 



SWAN is also attending town council budget meetings and discussing how Doughnut Economics might help.

In preparation of holding Doughnut Economic workshops, one SWAN member has prepared a thirty-page handbook, and members are refining slides and practicing leading workshops that will be held in the watershed.

Members have also created a database and maps of social and environmental dimensions of the watershed’s geosocial area.

Another member has launched a watershed fund to support local initiatives. And very recently, we secured an umbrella organization through which to raise funds."

(https://doughnuteconomics.org/stories/bringing-doughnut-economics-to-a-bioregion)


[[Category:Bioregional]]