
Overview from Trendwatching.com [http://www.trendwatching.com/trends/freelove.htm]


=Directory=

Via [http://www.meansofexchange.com/2012/06/08/the-top-9-swap-websites/]: 

www.swapz.co.uk
Swap site offering many goods and services. Current offers include a DJ who will work for you if you service his van and a woman who will dogsit in return for DVDs.

www.swapitshop.com
Goods for exchange, ranging from cars to banjos.

www.bigwardrobe.com
Clothes and accessories.

www.swishing.org
Shows you how to organise a clothes swap party with friends.

www.seedypeople.co.uk
For gardeners who have seeds to swap.

www.readitswapit.co.uk
Book-swapping site.

www.u-exchange.com
Houses all over the world available for holiday exchanges.

www.letslinkuk.net
Community networks which link people who want to swap their skills and goods.

www.staffshare.co.uk
Lets businesses swap staff members’ time with specialists in other firms.


=Examples=

"hundreds of millions of consumers own assets that enable them to swap, temporarily or permanently, everything from cars and (holiday) homes to books, furniture and DVDs, without spending a dime. Only hurdle: matching supply and demand. Which is—surprise surprise—where the online world comes in: swapping marketplaces are not only thriving, they're also increasingly going niche, as the number of wired consumers continues to grow. Some examples:

Much publicised CouchSurfing is a non-profit online service aiming to “Create a Better World, One Couch at a Time”. The site helps travelers find free places to stay and people to hang out with when they are traveling. Accommodation is entirely consensual between the host and surfer, and the duration, nature, and terms of the surfer's stay are generally worked out in advance. There are three methods to ensure security and trust: personal references, an optional credit card verification system, and a personal vouching system, whereby a member that had been vouched for might in turn vouch for any number of other members he or she knew or had met through CouchSurfing, and trusts. Over 440,000 CouchSurfers from 224 countries have signed up so far, and they've stayed at approximately 345,000 homes. 

Oh, and let's not forget about somewhat more traditional home exchanges: Digsville, Intervac, Home Base Holidays Home Exchange, Home Link and Craigslist are all in the business of unlocking hundreds of millions of holiday dollars/euros/pounds, swapping Manhattan walk-ups for villas in Tuscany, and Singapore penthouses for beach houses in Brazil.

And yes, there's a scary number of swapping marketplaces for books, CDs, DVDs, video-games and everything else, too: from Swaptree and Zunafish to HitFlip and SwapRocks. And then there's PeerFlix, Split Games and BookCrossing, and BookMooch, and BookHopper...

Hey, it may even work for cars: U.K.-based SwapMyWheels makes it possible for car owners to trade their automobiles for something more family-friendly, hipper, sleeker, smaller, bigger, quieter ... Rather than losing money by selling or buying via a car dealer, consumers can save a significant amount simply by swapping.

Earlier, we mentioned how FREE LOVE is being applied to stock photography. Well, swapping is entering this arena, too: Hungarian Stock.XCHNG has over 1,000,000 registered users and more than 250,000 photos online. Members can upload their own images in exchange for credits that they can use to buy other people's photos.

Oh, and one more wifi example: FON, a global wifi community, lets members share their home internet connections. In exchange, they get free access to hotspots provided by over 190,000 other members worldwide."
(http://www.trendwatching.com/trends/freelove.htm)


=Discussion=

Why the trend towards 'free' provision of goods and services?

Trendwatching.com:

"* An all-out war for consumers' attention (make that saturated consumers), including various handout and sampling techniques.
    
* The online world, with its amazing capacity to create, copy and distribute anything that's digital, with costs that are close to zero, forcing producers to come up with new business models/services, which are often purely ad-driven.
    
* The ever-decreasing cost of physical production makes it easier to offer more (nearly) free goods in the offline world too. In fact, many goods have actually become insanely cheap. Just one example: the price of televisions has fallen, on average, by 9 percent each year since 1998, according to U.S. Dept. of Labor data.
    
* The avalanche of free content created by attention-hungry members of GENERATION C.
    
* C2C marketplaces enabling consumers to swap instead of spend, making transactions cash-neutral.
    
* An emerging recycling culture.
    
* And all of the above fueling consumers' expectations to get online and offline stuff for free."
((http://www.trendwatching.com/trends/freelove.htm)




[[Category:Business]]