
'''= campaign for a city-owned utility for renewable energy in London'''

URL = http://switchedonlondon.org.uk/about-us/

=Description=

"We’re calling on the Greater London Authority – in collaboration with London boroughs – to set up a new, people-powered energy company.

We want an energy company that cuts bills and cuts polluting carbon emissions. A company under public ownership, selling energy for the common good, not for profit. A company with social justice, clean energy and democracy at its core.

 
==Social justice==

No one should go without warm homes and hot meals. Private companies should not be able to profit from our struggle to make ends meet.

* We want an energy company that offers fair, affordable prices, based on a progressive pricing system.
* We want an energy company that does not cut-off access to those who can’t pay and that does not install unwanted prepayment meters.
* We want an energy company that re-invests revenues in measures to address fuel poverty and the cost of living crisis, particularly prioritising ambitious investment in household energy efficiency.
* We want an energy company that treats its workers fairly, meaning paying at least a London Living Wage, good terms and conditions, secure, unionised and non-precarious work.
 

==Clean Energy==

London is behind schedule on meetings its renewables targets. But London must show leadership, committing to ambitious new investment in new clean technology fit for the 21st century.

* We want a company that commits ambitious public investment in new renewable energy generating capacity (we are initiating research into an appropriate specific investment target). A significant portion should be invested in renewable capacity inside London.

The GLA and London local authorities must divest their pension funds from fossil fuels, and re-invest this money to fund the new renewable capacity we need. Other public funding sources for new renewable investment to be explored are municipal bonds and borrowing.

* We want an energy company that aims to sell 100% renewable energy as soon as feasibly possible.
 

==Democracy==

We want a publicly owned alternative to the Big Six that is run according to the needs of energy users and workers, not for private gain. But we can do better than a return to top-down control.

We want a company fully owned by London public bodies (without any private partners) but controlled by people directly.

To do this, we want to integrate a range of democratic mechanisms, including:

* A board of directors made up of: 1/3rd London public officials; 1/3rd energy company employees elected democratically by the whole energy company workforce; 1/3rd ordinary London residents, elected democratically with all London residents and all non-London customers given a vote. Board membership must guarantee at least 50% representation of women.
* Annual open assemblies in every London borough, where representatives of the company have to answer questions and take input and advice.
* The creation of an online democratic forum where people can discuss and influence the company’s operations, including through public petitions.
* An obligation for the board to discuss public petitions, if backed by 1% or more of London’s population.
* An obligation for an online referendum on a proposal, if backed by 5% of London’s population.
100% transparency in all operations.
* These democratic measures apply to all London residents, regardless of citizenship/nationality status."
(http://switchedonlondon.org.uk/about-us/)

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:UK]]