
=Typology=

==[[Ernst Cassirer on the Five Forms of Symbolization]]==

Jeffrey Bishop:

"Ernst Cassirer, the early twentieth century neo-Kantian philosopher, argued that, rather than the a priori forms of space and time, we should understand the conditions of possibility for human thought to be immanentized symbolic forms. 


According to Cassirer, there are five symbolic forms including 

#mythology/religion, 
#art, 
#language, 
#history, and 
#science. 

These symbolic forms are given by a culture, and each form mediates some aspect of the relationship between the subject who encounters an object and the object that the subject encounters. '''Every culture has each of these symbolical forms''', even those cultures, like ours, that deny they have a mythology. Each symbolic form mediates a different aspect of knowledge. Mythology/religion mediates moral knowledge; art mediates aesthetic knowledge; history mediates knowledge of the past; language mediates many different kinds of knowledge about reality; and science mediates factual knowledge of reality.

According to Cassirer, 

* '''mythology is the dominant symbolic form for “primitive” cultures'''. Mythology anthropomorphizes of the powers of the universe. Thus, Poseidon/Neptune is the power of the sea; Hefestus/Vulcan is the power of the volcano and fire. Greco-Roman mythology represented the forces of the world anthropomorphically through myths. Yet, '''mythology does not have a moral dimension to it, according to Cassirer'''. The gods of Greece and Rome are fickle. Poseidon can destroy a human walking by the sea for no reason at all. They lack the moral dimension. Mythology anthropomorphizes what is the case. Power just is; it lacks an ought.

* Cassirer goes on to say that '''religion adds the moral “ought” to mythology'''. The power of Poseidon can destroy the human for no reason, but it ought not be the case. There is value to the person beyond the mere facts. '''Mytho-religion is the symbolic form that creates the moral code and moral duty''', in Cassirer’s philosophy. Mytho-religion mediates our relationships between God and humankind, between and among humankind, and between humankind and the rest of creation. In other words, Cassirer sees the moral dimension as adding the level of duty to the powers of reality, and the duties are spelled out by the law codes. I will say more about religion later.

* Cassirer says that in our day, science is the symbolic form that mediates our understanding of the powers of the world, now thought of as electromagnetism, gravity, the strong nuclear force, and the weak nuclear force. Yet, none of us have sense experiences of these forces."

(https://churchlifejournal.nd.edu/articles/toward-a-liturgical-cosmotechnics/?)

=Discussion=

William Irwin Thompson:

= "Symbolization, in which we have language and a tradition of artistic/sacred imagery in caves and on rocks. 

The shaman exists in the shift from Archaic and
‘Ever-present Origin’ to what Jean Gebser (1991) termed the Magical
structure of consciousness. But whether we wish to speak of the
proto-religion of the chimps with their ritual rain dance, or humans
with their mythologizing of moon and menses that I will explore in the
next section, we have to recognize that religion is basic to the evolution of consciousness and the development of the brain. It is utter nonsense on the part of Professor Richard Dawkins (2006) to look upon
religion as an aberration in human cultural evolution. A large brain
provided the hominids with the capacity for facial recognition and
pattern recognition in ranking hierarchies. It also provided them with
the evolutionary surplus that could be directed to systems of explanation, and religion is nothing if not a system of explanation. It really
doesn’t matter whether the explanation is fact or fiction; it is the
process itself of explaining events that is important. We may, at least
some of us, have outgrown the historical forms of religion that held
sway from 3500 BCE to 1945 CE, and recognize now that some philosophers, such as Jean Gebser, have looked upon religion as the deficient structure of consciousness and the Integral as the efficient form
carrying us forward, but religion was still an absolutely necessary
stage to go through. We could not have jumped over religion, as
Whitehead argued long ago (Whitehead, 1948), directly into the
scientific mentality without the interval of religious faith in the inherent rationality of the universe.
So I would prefer to trace the origins of religion all the way back to
the cultures of the chimpanzees and bonobos."

(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.64.853&rep=rep1&type=pdf)


==The temporarity of Symbolization==

William Irwin Thompson:

"In the hominization of the primates, there is a logarithmic progression in the rates of evolutionary changes. Hominization, from primate
to hominin, takes place over millions of years — from Proconsul to
Archaic Homo sapiens. Symbolization takes place over hundreds of
thousands of years, from roughly 200,000 BCE to 20,000 BCE.
Agriculturalization occurs over thousands of years, from 10,000 BCE
to 3500 BCE. Civilization takes place also over thousands of years,
from 3500 BCE to the fifteenth century CE. Industrialization takes
place over centuries from the fifteenth to the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, but Planetization takes place over decades, sped up by
electronics and genetic engineering — or from natural selection to
cultural intrusion."

(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.64.853&rep=rep1&type=pdf)


==Male and Female Origins of Symbolization==

William Irwin Thompson:

"The act of human thinking has two great sources — the production of
stone tools and fibre technologies and the mythologizing of menstruation by women. To pick up a rock, examine it, and then make it correspond to the class of Acheulian fist hatchets is to engage in abstract
thinking in sets. It also presents us with the incipient classes of nouns
and verbs in rock selection and pressure flaking and thus the emergence of grammatical thought. To create a fibre matrix of strands and
knots for baskets and skirts, such as we see on the reverse side of the
statuette called the Goddess of Lespugue, is to begin to think in numbers and recurring patterns. Also, to take menstrual blood and daub it
on the skin of the girl in menarche, first literally, then symbolically
with mined red ochre in the dance of all the young women in the tribe
(Dunbar et al., 1999, p. 128), is to mythologize a natural act in a cultural
ritual and performance of symbolic thinking. Menstruation reveals
‘the wound that heals itself’ in a monthly cycle that corresponds to the
lunar cycle. ‘As above, so below.’ Men, knowing the slash of the
wounded animal, would be in awe of the red vulva, and a system of ‘Old
Ma’s would develop to manage the awe and dread of the men in new
mystery rites. Indeed, we see such a system of matristic authority in the
culture of the bonobos. And most certainly we see it in the Venus of
Laussel, which is daubed with red ochre, and shown holding up the
lunar crescent with markings probably expressing the thirteen lunar
months of the year. So the origin of the mace of the Marshall in an academic procession may not be phallic, but an older calendrical stick of
the O’Ma and midwife that was adopted by males later to appropriate a
prestigious symbol of the authority of the female (Thompson, 1981)."

(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.64.853&rep=rep1&type=pdf)


=More information=

* [[Dream State of Ancient Humans]]
* [[Hominization]]

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]