'''Synergetics = a new way of thinking about how processes can reinforce each other for better results, and with more efficient input, conceived by Buckminster Fuller.'''


=Definition=

From the Wikipedia article at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synergetics

"Inspired by the laser theory and founded by Hermann Haken, synergetics is an interdisciplinary science explaining the formation and self-organization of patterns and structures in open systems far from thermodynamic equilibrium."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synergetics)

(note that the Wikipedia article differentiates between different meanings of the concept)


=Description=

''Synergetics''' is a concept and book by [http://www.p2pfoundation.net/index.php/Fuller%2C_Buckminster Buckminster Fuller], referring to the concept of either the output of a system not foreseen by the simple sum of the output of each system's part. A 'synergy' can also be defined as 'all sides contribute, and all sides win and receive the collective output of all contributing". Such a concept we can see being active in human interaction like [[Co-intelligence]], or even obvious applications like a wiki itself.

To provide a formal basis to this idea of Synergy, Buckminster Fuller created a whole new geometrical system, the "Synergetics". Contrary to classical euclidian geometry, Synergetics deals with aspects such as the strength or the stability  of forms, and is therefore especially adapted to applied geometry, such as architecture, or to understand the way nature uses forms. 
For instance, the triangle is a stabler structure than the square: create a triangle by putting together three rods in iron; try to "destroy" a triangle by pushing one of its sides: it is almost impossible. Now,do a square with four rods. Push one of the side. the square almost immediatelyy collapse. the only way to make a square stable is to triangulate it: using a diagonal to create two triangles. 

This example shows that some forms have a better "synergy" than others. From this knowledge, one may create new technological devices. For instance, the geodesic dome, the architectural structure for which Fuller is famous, uses the synergy of the triangles to become much more stable, although necessicating less material, than classical cubic buildings. Fuller's new geometrical forms play also a growing role in the new field of nanotechnology: some molecules have been labelled fullerenes in reference to his work.But Fuller never hesitates to use his concept in fields unrelated to architecture: it is, as the "Synergetics" book subtitle shows, a "geometry of thinking" aimed at completely revolutionize our way of seeing the world.

The knowledge of synergy, according to Fuller, may permit the the development of "ephemeralisation" (doing more with less) and contribute to the accelerating acceleration of progress (of which the Moore's law is the most striking example). In the beginning of his essay "The Magic Cauldron", Raymond acknowledge the relationship between Fuller's ephemeralization and the way free software is developped."


=Applications=

"In management science, synergetics was first applied to deliberative structures by Stafford Beer, whose syntegration method is based so specifically on geodesic dome design that only fixed numbers of persons, determined by geodesic chord factors, can take part in the process at each deliberation stage. Beer's work was briefly applied by the government of Salvadore Allende in Chile in the early 1970s, and survives today as a series of related management methods. All of these seek some macroscopic order of priorities by taking some path of integrating diverse positions or attitudes to some problem, making the synergetic assumption that priorities will converge.

There are similar themes in the work especially of Jay Forrester and Donella Meadows who sought leverage on social and management problems by seeking out an emerging macroscopic order. Under synergetic assumptions, this could often be reliably found by determining the points of greatest resistance to change by an older or inertial macroscopic order. The twelve leverage points of Meadows apply the order parameter concept but without making the assumption of "enslaving" lower-leverage points to the higher-leverage. A similar view is expressed in the deep framing theory of linguist George Lakoff, in which basic conceptual metaphors partly but do not completely determine the actions of their users."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synergetics)




=Excerpts=

Buckminster-Fuller:

Synergetics promulgates, a system of mensuration employing 60-degree vectorial coordination comprehensive to both physics and chemistry, and to both arithmetic and geometry, in rational whole numbers.  Synergetics originates in the assumption that dimension must be physical; that conceptuality is metaphysical and independent of size; and that a triangle is a triangle independent of size.  Since physical Universe is entirely energetic, all dimension must be energetic. Synergetics is energetic geometry since it identifies energy with number. Energetic geometry employees 60-degree coordination because that is nature‘s way to closest -pack spheres.  Synergetics provides geometrical conceptuality in respect to energy quanta.  In synergetics, the energy as mass is constant, and nonlimit frequency is variable.Vectors and tensors constitute all elementary definition.  


Experimentally Founded Mathematics

The mathematics involved in synergetics consists of topology, combined with vectorial geometry. Synergetics derives from experientially invoked mathematics. Experientially invoked mathematics shows how we may measure and coordinate omnirationally, energetically, arithmetically, geometrically, chemically, volumetrically, crystallographically, vectorially, topologically, and energy -quantum-wise in terms of the tetrahedron.  Since the measurement of light’s relative swiftness, which is far from instantaneous, the classical concepts of instant Universe and the mathematicians’ instant lines have become both inadequate and invalid for inclusion in synergetics.  Synergetics makes possible a rational whole-number, low-integer quantitation of all the important geometry of experience because the tetrahedron, the octahedron, the rhombic dodecahedron, the cube, and the vector equilibrium embrace and comprise all the latices of all the atoms. 
            

Angular Topology 

Synergetics is a triangular and tetrahedral system.  It uses 60-degree coordination instead of 90-degree coordination.  It permits conceptual modeling of the fourth and fifth arithmetic powers; that is, fourth – and fifth – dimensional aggregations of points or spheres in an entirely rational coordinate system that is congruent with all the experimentally harvested data of astrophysics and molecular physics; that is, both macro-and micro-cosmic phenomena.  It coordinates within one mensurational system the complete gears – interlocking of quantum wave mechanics and vectorial geometry. Synergetic topology integrates laws of angle and volume regularities with Euler’s point, area, and line abundance laws.
                          

Scope

Synergetics explains much that has not been previously illuminated.  It is not contradictory to any of the experimentally based knowledge of the classically disciplined sciences.  It does not contradict the calculus or any other mathematical tool for special-case applications, although it often finds them inadequate or irrelevant.  Experientially founded synergetics clearly identifies the conceptual limitations and coordinate functioning of all the classical tools of mathematics, and it shows how their partial functioning often frustrates comprehension of experience.  Synergetics follows the cosmic logic of the structural mathematics strategies of nature, which employ the paired sets of the six angular degrees of freedom, frequencies, and vectorially economical actions and their multi alternative, equieconomical action options.  Rather than refuting the bases of presently known Euclidean and non-Euclidean and hyperbolic and elliptic geometry, synergetics identifies the alternate freedoms of prime, axiomatic assumption from which the present mathematical bases were selected.  It embraces all the known mathematics.  All of the axiomatic alternatives are logical. Thus, original assumptions, illuminate the necessity for subsequent assignment of physical qualities to non-conceptual mathematical devices. Classical mathematics has, of necessity, assigned progressively, discovered attributes of physical Universe to irrational relationships with the ghostly, a priority Greek geometry. The quest for a mathematics expressing nature’s own design has been an elusive one. Synergetic has developed as the search for the omnirational, comprehensive, coordinate system, employed by nature, i.e., Universe, throughout all its complementary and interaccommodatively transforming transactions.  As Werner Heisenberg says “if nature leaves us to mathematical forms of great simplicity and beauty… to forms that no one has previously encountered, we cannot help thinking that they are ‘true,’ and that they reveal a genuine feature of nature.”

    
Synergetics altogether forsakes axioms as “ self – evident,” pre-microscope, superficial beliefs.  It predicates all of its relationship, explorations on the most accurately and comprehensively stable observations regarding direct experiences.  The new set of data employed by synergetics seemingly results in sublimely, facile expression of hitherto complex relationships.  It makes nuclear physics, a conceptual facility comprehensible to any physically normal child.  Synergetic discloses the excruciating awkwardness, characterizing present – day, mathematical treatment of the inner relationships of the independent scientific disciplines as originally occasion by their mutual and separate lack of awareness of the existence of a comprehensive, rational, coordinating system inherent in nature.  Synergetics makes possible the return to omniconceptual modeling of all physical intertransformations, and energy – value transactions, as exclusively expressed heretofor – especially throughout the last century – only as algebraic, nonconceptual transactions.  The conceptual modeling of synergetics does not contradict but compliments the exclusively abstract algebraic expression of physical universe, relationships that commenced approximately a century goal with the electromagnetic wave-discoveries of Hertz and Maxwell.  Their electrical – apparatus experiments made possible empirical verification or discard of their algebraic treatments of the measured data without being able to see or conceptually comprehend the fundamental energy behaviors.  The permitted discrete algebraic statement and treatment of invisible phenomena resulted in science’s comfortable, yielding to complete abstract mathematical processing of energy phenomena.  The abandonment of conceptual models removed from the literary men any conceptual patterns with which they might explain the evolution of scientific events to the non-mathematically languaged public. Ergo, the lack of modelability produced the seemingly unbridgeable social chasm between the humanities and the sciences.  
                     

Source:

* Synergetics (Explorations in the Geometry of Thinking) by R Buckminster Fuller pages 22 to 24     1975  Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc. New York
Collier Macmillan Publishers London 

** Physics and Beyond Harper &amp; Row, New York, 1970,  p. 68.


=More Information=


'''A Fuller explanation''' by Amy Edmondson : http://www.angelfire.com/mt/marksomers/40.html

an online book, probably the best introduction to Fuller's synergetics


'''Synergetics''': http://www.rwgrayprojects.com/synergetics/synergetics.html

The Fuller's "Bible", now online.

See also: [[Synergy]]



[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Synergy]]