
'''= blockchain-based social network that rewards its users'''


=Description=

"With current social networks, you are not the client. You are the product being sold.

The value you create by being a part of the network flows upwards immediately, reaching only a select few: those in control of the network. With Synereo, a completely decentralized and distributed network, you are in control. The value you create stays in your hands. 

Synereo is a next-gen social network that puts security, identity, and community management directly under your purview, respecting your attention and rewarding you for your activity on the network."
(http://www.de-centralize.com/decentralize-media-story-39657)



=Discussion=

Gideon Rosenblatt:

"Synereo is a complex, and quite exciting, collection of ideas for a very different approach to social networks. Like Diaspora before it, one of Synereo’s chief objectives is to remove our dependency on centrally controlled social networks. Synereo goes one step further by building on the distributed block chain technology at the heart of Bitcoin. You can read the Synereo plan to learn more details.

The first thing to note about Synereo is that it takes the notion of an “attention economy” very seriously. In Synereo, the value of one’s attention is determined by your “Reo,” a kind of stored reputation that inherently makes some users’ attention more valuable than others. Users with more Reo have an easier time getting their content seen by others, getting more compensation for their attention and getting more relevant information on the network.

Synereo will also use a crypto currency called AMPs, a “content flow currency” for amplifying information on the network. People or projects with lots of Reo probably won’t need AMPs, except for when trying to spread content beyond their normal network reach. You earn AMPs by contributing to the Synereo project, signing up and migrating information over from an existing social network, by getting others to join, by contributing to the development of the platform, and, critically, by paying attention to advertisements on the network.

It’s too early to know whether Synereo will succeed with its ambitious plans. What is clear to me is that the people behind this plan are doing some very good thinking about information flows within social networks. If they can build what they’re planning, it will be great advance over what we have today. One of the important questions I will be following is how Synereo’s designers handle the difficult tradeoffs around questions of fairness and the natural tendency of networks to concentrate resources into fewer and fewer hands."
(http://www.the-vital-edge.com/not-the-product/)

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]