
'''= "the intentionality of living things to self-organize and sustain themselves".'''


=Description=

James Quilligan:

"Just as Earth adheres to the first law of energy pressure and the second law of energy temperature, the third law establishes the independent conditions for organic growth, enabling the material elements of ecosystems to cohere by utilizing the energy that is available to them. Fantappie called this syntropy — the intentionality of living things to self-organize and sustain themselves (Prigogine 1980, 77--90). This self-producing quality of biological life exhibits the principle that no living system is without energy. All organisms concentrate radiant energy within their bodies to build resistance to energy dissipation, insulating them from the physical outcomes of entropy and transforming this specific form of sunlight into unique patterns of energy (T-W-Fiennes 1976, 43--56). For example, the natural self-ordering created through photosynthesis occurs through the absorption of solar energy and carbon dioxide by plants and trees, which is transferred indirectly to animals, humans, and other living organisms that consume the biomass of vegetation. This is how emergent, self-organizing systems work in syntropy with the second law that all material things move randomly toward waste and disorder. If a self-organizing physical being were not governed as much by syntropic as entropic qualities, the organism would not live for as long as it does (Prigogine 1980, 103--28)."

(https://online.ucpress.edu/gp/article/5/1/122343/203074/Who-Will-Pay-Back-the-Earth-Revaluing-Net-Energy)


==[[Syntropians]]==

Flavia Macedo:

" '''Sintropians''' are people who agree to be forces of syntropy inside the humanity spectrum. '''[[Syntropy]] (Sintropia) is the coordination force of creation, it's life's energetic principle of order and internal organization that attracts together ever-increasing complex forms to create something new. While entropy breaks things down, syntropy guides them together. It could be translated as life force or the energy behind the phenomena in which life creates conditions conducive to life, as it is mostly diffused through regenerative agriculture practices.''' The Sintropians I'm calling forth work inspired by life's coordinating principles to guarantee that we, as life forms, also create conditions conducive to life by building GCI as a life-centric tool.

...

The Sintropians who feel as an emergent property of their being the calling to build GCI in pursuit of these goals must initially look to the current state of the world, where we are drowning in wars, polarization, social inequalities, fake news, environmental destruction, corruption, and all the others symptoms of a failed world to realize all we need to let go of.

Most of our current habits of interaction and organization, which are rooted in fragmentation and destructive competition, are not suited for the development of a wholeness-based GCI. The basic cognitive processes needed for any kind of intelligence—collective or otherwise, like decision-making, problem-solving, sensemaking, remembering, and learning, are heavily impaired by the conflicting interests embedded in our geopolitical-economic arrangements. The first step to developing such cognitive processes globally is eradicating the perverse incentives guiding people toward individualistic actions by presenting them with an alternative coordinating language written through wholeness principles."

(https://sintropiadao.org/the-solution-sintropiadaos-life-centric-global-coordination-tool-a-3-dimensional-support-system-that-weaves-self-relationships-and-planetary-impact/)

[[Category:Complexity]]

[[Category:Cooperation]]
[[Category:Evolution]]
[[Category:Global_Governance]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]