The three cornerstones of the systemic economy are:

1/ '''Everything we do should contribute to common good:'''
The excellence of the company or organisation should serve common good (in whatever area).
The intention is thus shifted from accumulating money for ourselves, to creating value for all. Add value to commons, improve health, social connexion, housing, mobility, education,...
In itself, this cornerstone is an important split with the world of today. It's the most important philosophical shift of this new approach.
Instead of serving egos or individual wallets, collective excellence will contribute systemically multiple causes.

2/ '''Open the spectrum of value on 7 levels:'''
Value (assets) and potential (needs) is measured (qualified and quantified) on 7 levels
Value has been too much based on monetary scales. Any dying person will tell you the true value in life is elsewhere. 
1 Earth (impact vs. contribution/compensation)
2 Financial/matérial (traditional balance sheet)
3 Processes
4 Emotional (trust, motivation, ..)
5 Communication
6 Knowledge
7 Common Good (vs. collateral damage)
The S&P 500 stats also confirm that 87% of the value of stocks are immaterial. It’s high time to learn to measure that value and liabilities to be able to pilot in efficient ways.

3/ '''Switch from linear 2D to ecosystem 3D:'''
The linear "suppliers-clients" 2D business models are leaving place for stakeholders models in 3D.
In an old ego-based economy, where scarcity of resources make the fortune of a few, Plug-and-play with resources and needs on 7 levels opens up gigantic new opportunities to create activity and solutions. 

“Flow” is enhanced - coherence and authenticity too. Earth resources will be used smarter, intelligence will flow, motivation will drive, processes will become very efficient, communication will be enanced, common good will be taken care of by every individual and every organisation.

More on [http://www.setthenewgame.com www.setthenewgame.com]

[[Category:Economics]]