
=Characteristics=

(a selection from a comparison of alchemy with systems science)

John Uebersax [https://www.john-uebersax.com/plato/alchemy.htm]:


==1. Complex systems exist.==

Definition of complex system: a regularly interacting or interdependent group of items forming a unified whole, often hierarchically composed of other systems, and often with a definable goal, purpose, or course of development.


==2. Complex systems are ubiquitous.==

Biological organisms, societies, solar systems, ecosystems, economies, geopolitical structures and businesses are all complex systems.

Atoms are complex systems, composed of subatomic particles. Molecules are complex systems. Metals, ores and minerals are complex systems.

Human beings are complex systems.


==3. There is a science of Systems Theory.==

Systems theory studies general principles and properties of complex systems. As a recognized scientific discipline, it originated with the work of Bertalanffy around 1945, with later contributions made by others.
Systems theory is now widely studied. There are many professional societies (e.g., International Society for the System Sciences, Federation for Systems Research), journals (e.g., Complex Systems, Journal of Complex Systems) and scientific centers (e.g., Santa Fe Institute) devoted to it.


==4. Systems contain: components, structures and relations.==

True by definition. For example, a biological organism contains cells, groups of cells, and interactions among cells; societies consist of individuals, institutions, and relations; and so on.


==5. Basic principles apply to all complex systems.==

True by definition. Some general principles are listed below.

===5.1. Systems change over time.===

Systems come into being, evolve, and transform.

Complex systems may grow or decay; may progress or regress; may accelerate or decelerate their rate of change. They may be static or volatile, stable or unstable.

Change may be linear and gradual (example: simple growth of an organism), or it may be nonlinear, occurring in distinct phases (example caterpillar, chrysalis, butterfly)

Change may be self-initiated, or produced by outside factors. It may be spontaneous or scripted. Example: DNA contains a general script for the operation and development of a cell.

===5.2. A system may temporarily regress to an earlier stage.===

This may be normal, or it may be unhealthy.


===5.3. Systems may ordered or disordered.===

A system can be well-ordered or disordered, harmonious or discordant, well-regulated or chaotic, functional or dysfunctional. There are processes that may restore order or health to a disordered system; there are processes that may produce disorder in a previously ordered system.


===5.4. Systems may have recognizable goals, immediate and long-term.===

Example: an army waging war has the goal of defeating another army.


===5.5. Systems may interact with one another.===
They may cooperate or positively reinforce other systems, or they may compete with or negatively reinforce other systems. Example: two nations fighting, or engaged in productive trade. Systems may assimilate other systems, or be assimilated.


==6. Molecular structures are complex systems.==
Atoms, formed of electrons, protons and neutrons, bound by atomic forces, are complex systems. Molecules are systems of atoms.


==7. Minerals and ores are complex systems.==

Minerals and ores are complex systems composed of molecules. They have structures. There are internal forces. They are mixtures of elements, bound together with varying degrees of cohesion and uniformity.


==8. Metal extraction from ores and combination of chemicals are transformations of complex systems.==
An ore is a complex system containing metal and other minerals. The metal within the ore is a complex system. Heating and/or combination with other minerals effects a transformation of the form of the metal, letting it be separated from the surrounding mineral matrix.


==20. The human mind is a complex system.==

Most will accept this as obvious. Otherwise, consider the following.

Argument based on common language. Example: We routinely speak of a person changing his or her mind. Especially as this may be associated with observable behavioral changes, we do not doubt that some actual change of mind takes place.

Argument based on neurology. It seems beyond debate that brain neuronal systems constitute a complex system. Numerous parallels between neuronal activity and phenomenology or subjective experience are evident. Regardless of ones beliefs about causation between these two realms (if any), the parallels suggest that if the brain is a complex system, so is the mind.

Argument based on psychology and philosophy. Since Aristotle and before, philosophers and psychologists have referred to different "faculties" of the mind or psyche. These include memory, reason, sensation, conscience, etc. These presuppose mental structures, entities, and relations among them. More recently, Freud and others have postulated psychodynamic models. Widespread acceptance of some of these (such as the tripartite model of id, ego, and superego) suggests they are plausible, realistic and of practical value.


==21. It is evident that human beings and the human mind undergo transformations.==

We speak of a reformed gambler, alcoholic, or criminal; or of religious conversion. St. Paul (Rom 12:2) tell but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind" (metanoia).

Most cultures have special rituals and ceremonies, rites of passage, to mark transition from one stage, phase, or state of life to another.

Psychologists like Jean Piaget and Erik Erikson have identified recognizable stages of human cognitive and personality development.

These and other examples make clear that we routinely accept that important changes to the human mind occur in a way interpretable as nonlinear transformation.

It is possible that such transformations have identifiable general principles, that we may discover them, and that they are in some way related to principles of transformation in other domains, including chemistry, physics -- and alchemy.


==22. Psychology, physiology and common custom recognize different states of consciousness.==

Examples: Waking, sleep, intoxication, arousal, depression.

Some physiological models and data (for example, EEG studies) suggest that transitions among these states are nonlinear rather than gradual, and related to principles of systems theory like chaos theory and attractors.


==24. Society is also a complex system.==

If alchemical principles are applicable to psychological transformation, it is also possibly they apply to various kinds of societal transformations."

(https://www.john-uebersax.com/plato/alchemy.htm)

[[Category:Science]]
[[Category:Network Theory]]