
'''* Article: Bedeski,, Robert Ph.D. (2022) "The Future of Civilization: A Systems Approach," Comparative Civilizations Review: Vol. 87: No. 87, Article 7.'''

Available at: https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/ccr/vol87/iss87/7

=Description=

"Civilization is one of several stages of human evolution and forms a system of interaction. Its past dominance is now challenged by growth of three subsystems — state, economy, and science/technology. These three subsystems have matured through application of rational knowledge. The vertically integrated state now dominates society and demarcated territory. The horizontally integrated global economy and global science/technology society have become worldwide in scope. State domination is reinforced by autonomous global science and international capital. The remaining subsystem of Moral Knowledge occupies present non-material civilization and is characterized by organic knowledge and embracing the unprovable, which includes religion, art, morality, literature, and philosophy. Reflecting this bifurcation, two global political persuasions are emerging — Statism includes communists, socialists, and progressives; Civism (Civilizationists) embraces non-material humanism and regards the three rational autonomous systems as helpful tools but not ends in themselves."

=More information=

For excerpts, see: [[Civism vs Statism]]

[[Category:Civil Society]]
[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]
[[Category:Articles]]