'''= Project SAGE-P is a Special Interest Group (SIG) of the International Society for Systems Science (ISSS)'''

URL =


=Description=

"The Project SAGE-P (i.e., System of Accounts for Global Entropy Production) is a revolutionary methods to account for emergent properties of complex systems. The metric is the Second Law of thermodynamics or the rate of entropy production per unit of consumption, or its inverse, rate of entropy efficiency per unit of production. The accounting matrix describes the inflow = production, and the outflow = consumption, in any well-defined, Low Entropy Fund, (LEF). The balance sheet of the LEF is (a) surplus-state, (i.e., sustainable + growth ), (b) equilibrium-state, (sustainable + zero-growth), (c) deficit-state, (unsustainable + degrowth). The Project is a Special Interest Group (SIG) of the International Society for Systems Science (ISSS) and open to interested researchers."
(https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Anthony_Friend?)


=More information=

'''* Article/chapter: System of Accounts for Global Entropy-Production (SAGE-P): The Accounting in the Topological Domain Space (TDS) of the Econosphere, Sociosphere, and the Ecosphere, September 2017; DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-38919-6_6; In book: Green Economy Reader'''

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308498966_System_of_Accounts_for_Global_Entropy-Production_SAGE-P_The_Accounting_in_the_Topological_Domain_Space_TDS_of_the_Econosphere_Sociosphere_and_the_Ecosphere

"This chapter describes the accounts of the Econosphere, Sociosphere and Ecosphere governed by the Second Law of thermodynamics. Applied symmetries of ?production? (i.e., neg-entropy), ?consumption? (i.e., entropy) and capital accumulation (i.e., net-valued low entropy fund available for human consumption). These entropy production accounts permits holistic assessment of sustainability in the following state condition: (a) steady-state, (neg-entropy = entropy), (b) surplus-state, (neg-entropy > entropy) and (c) deficit-state (neg-entropy < entropy). Examined are the root of entropy accounting in the labour theory of values and the Ricardian (long-term) production equations of distribution of wages, profits and rent. This is contrasted to the neoclassical general equilibrium hypothesis of unlimited productivity per unit of consumption and where distributions are determined by state conditions of the supply and demand curve governed by consumer choice and/or preference functions. We introduce the equations of the entropic process described by G-R Flow-Fund Model whereby quantitative (material) production functions are transcribed into qualitative (immaterial) consumption functions, (i.e., enjoyment of Product). This powerful logic of entropy production as a limit function of Production, Consumption and Capital Accumulation, reinstates the Ricardian hypothesis of the longterm end result of Capitalism: Wages fall to subsistence, Profits fall to zero, and Rents rise to a maximum. The SAGE-P provides the accounts of entropy production essential for redirecting the trajectories of unsustainable growth, towards a sustainable economy reduced to maintaining the stock (i.e., wealth) of any well-defined Low Entropy Fund (LEF) available for human consumption, (see Fig. 6.4). The object of policy is thus redefined as the minimum socially acceptable rate of entropy production per unit of consumption."


'''* Article: Towards a Comprehensive Framework for Environmental Statistics: A Stress-Response Approach.''' "2016 Berlin Conference on Global Environmental Change: Transformative Global Climate Governance après Paris on 23 and 24 May 2016System of Accounts for Global Entropy-Production (SAGE-P): A Coherent Accounting of the Econosphere, Sociosphere, and the Ecosphere formalised in Topological Domain Spaces (TDS) Anthony Friend, (University of Ottawa)

Available from: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281396191_Towards_a_Comprehensive_Framework_for_Environmental_Statistics_A_Stress-Response_Approach [accessed Feb 15 2021].

Abstract: This  paper  describes  the  accounts  beyond  GDP,  described  by  the  TDS  of  the Econosphere, Sociosphere  and Ecosphere governed  by  the  Second  Law  of  thermodynamics.  Defined  are  complex  input/output  algorithms  of  the 1entropic  process  reduced  to  nonlinear  double-entry  bookkeeping  for  the  flow  variables  of ’production’ defined  as ‘neg-entropy,’ the   flow   variables   of ‘consumption’   defined   as entropy   and   the   stock   variables   of capital accumulation, defining  the  Low  Entropy  Fund  (LEF)  available  for  human-consumption.  The  balance  sheet  of SAGE-P  assumes  a  pluralistic-value  formulation  in  the  following  states  of  the  LEF:  (a) steady-state:  (i.e.,  rate  of neg-entropy production t+n = rate of entropy production t+n), (b) surplus-state: (i.e., rate of neg-entropy production t+n >  rate  of  entropy  production t+n),  and  (c) deficit-state:  (i.e.,  rate  of  neg-entropy  production t+n  <  rate  of  entropy production t+n).    The  roots  of  SAGE-P  may  be  found  in  the  labour  theory  of  value  coupled  with  the  Malthus-Ricardian (long-term) prediction  of wages falling to subsistence, profits falling to zero and rents rise to a maximum. Contrast this to the neoclassical (long-term) prediction of growing efficiency in production satisfying human wants,  through  the  hypothetical  supply  and  demand  curve  governed  by  rational  choices  of  the  agents  of  production, consumption  and  investment.    Introduced  to  the  reader  are  the  equations  of  the  entropic  process  described  by  G-R Flow-Fund  Model.  The  object  of  the  accounts  is  to  translate  the  quantitative  (material)  production  of  the Econosphere (i.e., values conserved-in-exchange) into the distinct language of qualitative immaterial product of the Sociosphere  (i.e.,  values  conserved-in-use)  and  the  quantitative/qualitative  material  product  of  the Ecosphere  (i.e., values  conserved  in  themselves,  or  existential).  Central,  and  unique,     to  SAGE-P  is  the  clear  distinction  made between the accounting of ‘physical objects/functions’ that occupy space and time, and ‘abstract objects/functions,’  that  occupy  time  but  not  space. This  type  of  accountings  enables  the  mapping  of  material  world  on  the  immaterial world and vice versa. Another unique feature of   SAGE-P is the implicit hierarchical structure of values where the objects and functions of the Econosphere is an implied sub-set of the larger Sociosphere, which in turn, is a subset of the  still  larger Ecosphere.   The    SAGE-P  provides  the  conceptual  framework  for  the  coherence  of  production, consumption and capital accumulation of the whole Planet, and yet, like any coherent structure, enables the user to define  the  boundary  conditions  of  the  accounting  objects  and  function  to  fit  their  analytical  frame."

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]