
'''* Report: Tackling Poverty: the power of a universal basic income. Bh Howard Reed, Kate Pickett et al. Basic Income Conversation / Compass, 2022'''

URL = https://autonomy.work/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/Full_Paper_Lansley_Tackling_Poverty.pdf


=Description=

Stewart Lansley et al. :

"This report examines the distributive impacts of three UBI and are broadly designed to provide a potential pathway to a starter scheme to provide an entry payment; the second an intermediate scheme and the third a full MIS payment to which increases in less generous schemes can be aimed over time. We use microsimulation of data from the Family Resources Survey to outline the static distributive impacts and costs of the schemes. capacity to cut child poverty to an historic low, below the low point achieved in the late 1970s, thus achieve more than the antipoverty interventions of the New Labour Governments from 2000. standards and life chances of millions of people and, despite the claims made by some critics of UBI, would be both feasible introducing a basic income, that the payment levels are either too."



=More information=

About the publishers:

"About the Basic Income Conversation 

* The Basic Income Conversation is an initiative, powered by Compass, to promote the idea of a universal basic income in the UK. We work with people across civil society to understand the opportunities, questions and concerns around basic income. We help organisations decide if they should add basic income to their reforms. We work with researchers to ensure the basic income debate is informed by research. We help coordinate a growing network of cross-party politicians and activists to put basic income at the top of the political agenda. 

* About Compass Compass is the pressure group for a good society, a world that is much more equal, sustainable and democratic. We build alliances of ideas, parties and movements to help make systemic political change happen. One strategic focus is on policy ideas that are rooted in real needs now but which have transformative potential. Introducing a universal basic income is one such policy and speaks to every element of the good society we want to create by providing more freedom, independence, time security and sense of citizenship. This is our third report on basic income and shows how a desirable and feasible scheme could be implemented. The next stage is to build a national coalition in support of a basic income."


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:UK]]