URL: http://tacticalphilanthropy.com/


"Our mission is to bring innovation, effectiveness and joy to philanthropy.

Tactical Philanthropy Advisors is a full-service advisory firm. We serve high net worth donors with between $1 million and $50 million or more in philanthropic assets. Our services include setup, administration, and ongoing advice for private foundations and donor advised funds. We also provide services for wealth managers, estate planners, CPAs and family offices to help them better serve their clients’ philanthropic needs.

Prior to starting Tactical Philanthropy Advisors, Sean Stannard-Stockton spent a decade in the wealth management industry and co-founded a successful investment advisory firm that caters to the needs of philanthropic families. A former columnist for the Financial Times, current columnist for the Chronicle of Philanthropy and author of the influential blog, Tactical Philanthropy, Sean is a sought-after public speaker and a leading expert in philanthropy.

Through working arrangements with the Fidelity Charitable Gift Fund, Schwab Charitable, Calvert Giving Fund and Foundation Source, Tactical Philanthropy Advisors provides clients with institutional quality back office, administrative services paired with relationship-driven, high-touch advisory services.

Our clients are assigned a primary philanthropy advisor who gets to know the unique interests of each individual or family and builds a customized plan to meet their needs. It is not our job to tell you where to give. Instead, we work to empower our clients with the knowledge and expertise they need to make the best decisions about their philanthropy."