

=Description=

Mike Lydon:

"While larger scale efforts do have their place, incremental, small-scale improvements are increasingly seen as a way to stage more substantial investments. This approach allows a host of local actors to test new concepts before making substantial political and financial commitments. Sometimes sanctioned, sometimes not, these actions are commonly referred to as “guerilla urbanism,” “Pop-up Urbanism,””Lighter, Quicker, Cheaper,” “City Repair,” “Changescaping,” or “D.I.Y. urbanism.”

For the moment, we like “Tactical Urbanism,” which is a pattern that features the following five characteristics:

- A deliberate, phased approach to instigating change;
- The offering of local solutions for local planning challenges;
- Short-term commitment and realistic expectations;
- Low-risks, with a possibly a high reward; and
- The development of social capital between citizens and the building of organizational capacity between public-private institutions, non-profits, and their constituents.

In short, tactical urbanism interventions create a laboratory for experimentation. Case studies from across North America reveal the benefit of taking an incremental approach to the process of city building."
(http://patterncities.com/archives/175)


=Examples=

Mike Lydon:

"In some cases, cities follow the lead of their citizens by implementing short-term, low-budget livability improvements initiated by citizen-activists. In other cases, it’s the city who takes the lead.

New York City, for example, is currently designing and implementing more permanent changes to its many street design “pilot projects.” Such project have cost very little and have largely been deemed a success. Numerous other cities are now undertaking a similar approach. The tactical approach to street design is the pattern, and New York has become the pattern city. A recent example can be found in the ongoing redesign of Pike and Allen Streets in Manhattan’s Lower East Side. According to the NYC DOT, the temporary materials used to “right-size” the corridor had an almost instant safety and livability impact, which encouraged the city to then make a more permanent investment.

Tactical urbanism is now being used deliberately across North America and around the world. Indeed, as a planning technique, it has become a real pattern that may be observed globally as cities and their inhabitants become more open to catalyzing long term change with short term action.

The Better Block Project, as implemented in Dallas and Fort Worth, Texas, then Oyster Bay, New York, and then Memphis, Tennessee is but one example. "
(http://patterncities.com/archives/175)

=More Information=

* Tactical urbanism survey, http://www.scribd.com/doc/51354266/Tactical-Urbanism-Final


[[Category:Urbanism]]