= participant in the [[Asia Commons Deep Dive]] workshop


=Bio=


Taimur currently works for the UNDP in the Asia-Pacific Regional Centre in Bangkok. He has been with UNDP since 2003 in various capacities.

Presently, he is a Policy Specialist  advising governments in Asia on economic planning/policy formulation.  His areas of specialization are economic and social inequality, social protection and food security. 

Previously, as a speechwriter to the Asia Pacific Bureau Director (Assistant Secretary General) at UNDP Headquarters from 2003-2008 he covered a range of topics including MDGs, Trade, Private Sector Development, and Inequality. 

He also worked as an Inequality Specilaist in Sri Lanka  at UNDP's Regional Centre in Colombo from 2008-2010; he led the work on social and economic inequality in Asia, the research effort culminated in a series of country case studies.

Prior to joining UNDP, Taimur opened a primary level school in Rawalpindi, Pakistan for children that previously worked in brick kilns.

He holds a BA degree in Philosophy and Mathematics from Williams College (MA, USA) and Oxford University (Oxford, UK) and an MA in Economics from the New School University (New York, USA). He maintains a regular blog on UN-wide Teamworks (an external knowledge sharing platform) on issues related to development. Recent posts have covered UN Reform, Inequality, Social Justice, and the Vocabulary of Development. They can be read at https://undp.unteamworks.org/node/12651/list?type_1[0]=blog

=Publications=

Blog: UN Teamworks https://www.unteamworks.org 
 
2012 Looking Beyond Income Inequality, Official Background Paper, "Addressing Inequalities" Global Thematic Consultation for the Post 2015 Development Framework, UNICEF and UNWOMEN, New York, USA.
 
2012 HARITA: A Rural Resilience Initiative, Case Study Series, Asia Pacific Millennium Development Goal 1 Roadmap, Regional Thematic Working on Hunger and Poverty, United Nations, Bangkok, Thailand. http://www.snap-undp.org/elibrary/Publication.aspx?id=705
 
2012 Way forward and MDGs beyond 2015. In ADB, UNESCAP, UNDP Accelerating Equitable Achievement of the MDGs: Closing Gaps in Health and Nutrition Outcomes. United Nations
 
2010 The Loss of Egalitarian Capitalism. In Arrested Development in Asia, Studies in the Growth Economies of Asia, Omar Noman (Ed.). Milton Park, UK: Routledge.
 
2010 Seven drivers for achieving the MDGs. In ADB, UNESCAP, UNDP Paths to 2015, MDG Priorities in Asia and the Pacific. United Nations
 
2010 Asia Rising? Inequality and Patterns of Growth in Asia and Pacific. Criterion 5(2). Retrieved from http://www.criterion-quarterly.com/pdf/Criterion%20Vol%205%20No%202.pdf
 
2010 Securing the MDGs through Social Protection. In ADB, UNESCAP, UNDP Regional MDG Report: A Future Within Reach. United Nations
 
2009 August 5. A Pakistani Visits Home A Decade Later, The Huffington Post. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/taimur-khilji/a-pakistani-visits-home-a_b_250470.html.  
 
Regular Contributor, The Friday Times (A Leading Pakistani Weekly)
 
2005. Political Implications of the Tsunami. Harvard Asia-Pacific Review 8(1), Cambridge, MA. http://www.hcs.harvard.edu/~hapr/summer05_envi/index.html
 
2005. Review of Why Globalization Works, by Martin Wolf. Journal of Economic Studies 32(3).
 
2004. Opening Doors to Opportunity: Afghanistan’s Millennium Development Goals Report prepared for the Berlin Conference on Afghanistan, April 1, in Berlin, Germany. UNDP


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Thailand]]