'''* Book: The Tao of Democracy: Using Co-Intelligence to Create a World that Works for All, by Tom Atlee, with Rosa Zubizarreta. Cranston, R.I.: Writers’ Collective, 2003.'''


=Description=

'''1. From the publisher'''

“Demonstrating that groups, communities and whole societies can be more intelligent and wise collectively than most brilliant individuals, Tom Atlee shows how ‘collective intelligence’ could revolutionize politics and governance, bringing wise common sense to every issue – from city budgets to terrorism to global warming. …Readers will find descriptions and links to over a hundred proven approaches to this new form of democracy – organizations, participatory practices, innovations, books and more. The most powerful innovations – citizen deliberative councils – have been used hundreds of times around the world – from Denmark to India, from Brazil to the U.S."


'''2.'''

"The Tao of Democracy describes a new vision of politics and governance that can simultaneously address our unprecedented social problems and build a society that works for all.

It demonstrates how very different people can now find creative common ground and shared wisdom together. And it tells us how to use that fact to bring our dusty old politics up to speed, and find the wisdom we need to safely navigate the 21st century.

While the political vision in The Tao of Democracy is new, it is grounded in dozens of proven group processes, techniques and political models which it describes in detail.

Based on the philosophical insights of modern systems thinking, Eastern spirituality and recent developments in dialogue and social self-organization, The Tao of Democracy shows how a few relatively simple changes in our political institutions can produce a wise government of the people, by the people and for the people, at last.

The real-life stories, creative ideas and explicit how-to guidance in this book offer inspiration and tools for everyone who wants effective groups, healthy communities and a better world."
(http://www.taoofdemocracy.com/about.html)


=More Information=

See also: The Co-Intelligence Institute – http://www.co-intelligence.org

[[Category:Books]]


[[Category:Politics]]