A proposal for the organization of work in a physical economy based on [[Peer Production]], in his book [[From Exchange to Contributions]]

=Description=

From Stefan Meretz:

"Now, how can needs of the producers be coordinated with the needs of the
consumers? Today peer projects can function, because peers dispose of
production means and because non-physical goods being once created can
almost arbitrarily be reproduced. This does not apply to the physical
world. Peer projects of physical goods have to demand an adequate
compensation for the taking of goods requiring each time anew an effort
to produce them.

But which contribution is adequate? This question is decided by the
project. It weights the contributions using the time duration inversely
proportional to its popularity: unpopular tasks only require a small
contribution, while popular tasks require a big contribution. This
sounds similar to role the economic value is playing in market economy.

The economic value maps complex actions on simple once. However, while
always complex actions are manifolds of simple once---resulting in less
volume of spending---a generalized peer production tend to function the
other way around: Simple tasks no one likes to do will be highly
weighted to guarantee its execution, while popular and often highly
qualified tasks get a lower weight. The weighting---according to the
proposal---is nothing static, but is permanently adjusted. This
adjustment is done automatically using an »auctioning system« mediating
demand and supply. Thus one hour garbage removal can thoroughly
correspond to one week writing computer programs.

Concerning the allocation of the goods peer projects join together and
form distribution pools, in order to be able to provide a larger
bandwith of useful goods. At the same time the project extent should
(but not need to) be straightforward, problems should be handled
directly »peer to peer«. Everybody contributing something to a local
project can gather goods from the respective distribution pool.
Depending on the type of goods the ways of disribution differ, from
flat rate allocation to preference weighting."


=Key Book to Read=

Christian Siefkes. [[From Exchange to Contributions]].

[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Peereconomy]]