
'''= Tavern is a distributed, anonymous, unblockable network designed to ensure that no one is silenced, censored, or cut off from the rest of the world'''

URL = https://tavern.com/

=Description=

"Tavern is a distributed, anonymous, unblockable network designed to ensure that no one is silenced, censored, or cut off from the rest of the world. Tavern runs on computers small and large, forming a scalable meshnet where anyone can communicate freely and openly, without fear of censorship or oppression. Each machine that joins the network makes it stronger and more resilient, and helps protect the privacy and free speech of every other user. Powerful encryption ensures no one will be eavesdropping on your conversations.

Tavern is a community built by and of its citizens and their communities, designed to let you control exactly who you want to be. Whether you want to post under your real name, or as WilcoFan17, you never have to share more than you want to.

Tavern is built around ensuring that you can always make this choice for yourself, restricting the options for harassment, stalkers and trolls. Tavern lets you share and post whatever you want - It supports messages in text, but also has built-in support for sharing photos, videos and other (legal) data, all copied through the same network, and shared with whomever you want. It also supports private person-to-person messages, which are encrypted so only the intended recipient can open and read them. "


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]