
'''* Book: Teaching Community Technology Handbook. Detroit Community Technology Project,'''

URL = http://detroitcommunitytech.org/teachcommtech

=Description=

'''1.'''

"This 100+ page handbook will take you through the history of popular education while offering a step-by-step guide to developing community rooted technology workshops and curricula. Community Technology focuses on teaching strategies that make learning technology accessible and relevant. We believe sharing these teaching practices has the potential to diversify and shape technology fields to be community-oriented. The handbook introduces Community Technology as a series of educational practices. The more people know about the technology around them, the more they will be able to participate in shaping their environment."


2. 

"The handbook combines theories and methods by Paulo Freire, Myles Horton, Grace Lee Boggs, Bernice McCarthy, Susan Morris, Grant P Wiggins, and Jay McTighe.

We share learning from the success of 1960s Freedom Schools in the South, through which Black people used pop ed to spread literacy and pass the tests meant to keep them from voting.

Today, we live in an era where technology is interwoven with government, healthcare, social services and education.

As cities shift towards data driven development and wireless infrastructures, it is important to build the digital capacity of neighborhoods to shape their own environments."


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Courses]]