'''* Book: Technovedanta 2.0. By  Antonin Tuynman. Self-published, 2018'''

URL =

=Description=


"Technovedanta 2.0 is at the junction where science and technology meet spirit in the light of the “Technological Singularity”. It is written for people with a scientific or philosophical orientation and with an interest in (eastern) spirituality. The book aims to explore the concept of consciousness as the foundation of being and to provide a complete theoretical and technological digital framework to integrate all possible knowledge of matter, mind, information and mysticism without contradictions. Its basic tenet is that Panpsychism and Pancomputationalism are not contradictory notions, but two sides of the same coin that constitutes existence. The book also aims to show the limits of logic and science and furthermore aims to rid people of their self-inflicted belief systems. In fact, the book is an epistemological quest showing how philosophy, religion, logic and science fail to provide reliable knowledge and are speculative at best."

[https://www.amazon.com/Transcendental-Metaphysics-Technovedanta-Pancomputational-Panpsychism-ebook/dp/B07D912ZW7]


=Reviews=

(from the amazon page)

K. Mapson:

"Tuynman draws from a diverse array of philosophical forbears, from Hegel to Alfred North Whitehead to Buckminster Fuller to Terrance McKenna -- not all of whom are recognized as philosophers (he titles Ray Kurzweil and Peter Diamandis, for example, as "contemporary technoprophets"), but all of whom can be recognized as such when their observations are set in Tuynman's grand context. His analysis of the autopoietic is auto-poetic (just as his poetry is profoundly analytic). It feels as if he is consistently pulling the covers of reality back to reveal intuitively realized mechanisms of our Universe from the most modern concepts of science, and then tying these back, again and again, to some of the most ancient philosophical ideas. He does not blur the lines between these frames of thought; he demonstrates that the lines are an illusion, a construct dissolved simply by turning to observe from a different angle."


=More information=

A earlier 2016 iteration ?

"Will the internet one day awaken as a conscious entity? Or do we need to design a structured architecture in order to impart the quality of consciousness to the web? In the present book Technovedanta an architecture for the internet as AwwwareNet is proposed based on stratifications derived from the Indian philosophy of Vedanta to create a functional mimic of consciousness, quasi-consciousness. The deep exploration in Nature's fundamental primacy of consciousness led me to the hypothesis of a panpsychic theory of everything."
([https://www.amazon.com/Technovedanta-Antonin-Tuynman/dp/1326784773])

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]