
'''* Special Issue / CFP: technology and Degrowth. Journal of Cleaner Production, 2015'''

URL = http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.06.107


=Summary=

"Few issues in the rapidly expanding body of Degrowth research (e.g. D'Alisa et al., 2014, Sekulova et al., 2013 and Kallis et al., 2010) are as controversial and at the same time scientifically underexplored as the role of technology in the transition to a Degrowth society. The declaration of the Barcelona conference in 2010 called for selective moratoria on certain technologies (“Barcelona Declaration”, 2010), but discussions in Leipzig in 2014 were far from such a consensus. Two contrapositions were apparent: technology criticism following Illich, 1973, Elull, 1964 and Schumacher, 1973 and other critical authors versus technology enthusiasm that, for example, agrees with Gorz (1994) on the potential of digital fabricators. Ideas of simplification of life with less or low technology clash with visions of a true democratisation of society through the use of certain technologies (both high and low tech) such as open source programming, DIY tractors and photovoltaic panels. However, reality is not as “black and white” as it may seem. There is a wide range of potentially overlapping positions around scepticism and enthusiasm towards the role of technologies in Degrowth. This special volume aims to present and discuss these positions based on theoretical and empirical perspectives from authors with diverse backgrounds such as Science and Technology Studies, Philosophy of Technology, Ecological Economics, Industrial Ecology, Technology Assessment, Innovation Studies, Political Science and Anthropology. It focuses on how technology transforms ecology, society and the economy and emphasizes inter- and transdisciplinary approaches.

The special volume aims to both provide 1) a state of the art selection of current discussions of the role of technology within Degrowth in academia and practice and 2) a deepened reflection on technologies with the aim to specify perspectives and to overcome their entrenchment. The first section will revisit influential thinkers (Illich, Elull, Schumacher, Georgescu-Roegen, Castoriadis, the Luddites, etc.) and introduce promising approaches towards technology, which have not yet entered the Degrowth discourse. The second section will provide space for authors calling for a “democratisation of technology”, including practice-oriented case studies. These argue, among others, that problems of technology can be overcome through open access and elimination of undemocratic control by corporations and elites. A third section includes contributions from authors showing how technologies can be evaluated and assessed from a Degrowth perspective. These contributions depart from the premise that technologies are neither per se beneficial nor detrimental for a Degrowth society. They develop normative guidelines and selection criteria for a framework to map roles of technologies in the Degrowth context. Finally, we are open to complementary analyses of Degrowth and technology, which explore novel takes on this important issue and provide outlooks on how future practice and research on technology and Degrowth might or should unfold."

=More Information=

* Christian Kerschner, Assistant Professor, Department of Environmental Studies, Masaryk University. More information. Email: christian.kerschner@gmail.com


==Bibliography==

Barcelona Declaration, 2010
Barcelona Declaration [WWW Document] (2010) URL http://www.barcelona.degrowth.org/fileadmin/content/documents/Degrowth_Declaration_Barcelona_2010.pdf (accessed 21.01.14.)

Bijker, 1995
W. Bijker
Of Bicycles, Bakelites and Bulbs: towards a Theory of Sociotechnical Change
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (1995)

Castoriadis, 1985
C. Castoriadis
Reflections on “Rationality” and “Development”
Thesis Eleven, 10/11 (1) (1985), pp. 18–35

D'Alisa et al., 2014
G. D'Alisa, F. Demaria, G. Kallis
Degrowth: a Vocabulary for a New Era
Routledge, New York and London (2014)

Dickson, 1975
D. Dickson
The Politics of Alternative Technology
Universe Books, New York (1975)

Domènech et al., 2013
L. Domènech, H. March, D. Saurí
Degrowth initiatives in the urban water sector? A social multi-criteria evaluation of non-conventional water alternatives in Metropolitan Barcelona
J. Clean. Prod., 38 (2013), pp. 44–55

Article | PDF (391 K) | View Record in Scopus | Citing articles (10)
Elull, 1964
J. Elull
The Technological Society
Vintage, New York (1964)

Feenberg, 1999
A. Feenberg
Questioning Technology
Routledge, New York (1999)

Georgescu-Roegen, 1971
N. Georgescu-Roegen
The Entropy Law and the Economic Process
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (1971)

Gorz, 1994
A. Gorz
Capitalism, Socialism, Ecology
Verso, London (1994)

Illich, 1973
I. Illich
Tools for Conviviality
Harper & Row, New York (1973)

Kallis et al., 2010
G. Kallis, F. Schneider, J. Martinez-Alier
Growth, recession or Degrowth for sustainability and equity? (Special Issue)
J. Clean. Prod., 18 (6) (2010), pp. 511–518

Latouche, 2009
S. Latouche
Farewell to Growth
Polity Press, Cambridge, UK (2009)

Mumford, 1967
L. Mumford
The Myth of the Machine – Technics and Human Development
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, San Diego (1967)

Schumacher, 1973
E.F. Schumacher
Small is Beautiful: a Study of Economics as if People Mattered
Blond & Briggs, London (1973)


[[Category:Post-Growth]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Degrowth]]

[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]