'''* Article: TECHNOLOGIES OF CIVIL SOCIETY. Communication, participation and mobilization. By Kingsley Dennis. Innovation, Vol. 20, No. 1, 2007'''

URL = http://kingsleydennis.files.wordpress.com/2010/07/technologies-of-civil-society.pdf


=Abstract=

"Emerging technologies of communication and cooperation are increasingly mediated through
flows of connectivity and information, leading to distributed forms of civil participation. In this
article I discuss ‘technologies of civil society’ whereby people who are investing in informationaccess,
increased mobility and knowledge-sharing contribute to multiple networks of coparticipation
and cooperation. Civil society is increasingly becoming visible through the
technologies used to receive, organize and utilize the information flows. In order to sustain
cooperation, complex interrelations between individuals and their technically mediated communications
must of necessity be deliberate and intentional strategies. I argue that communication
technologies are informing strategies of civil participation and cooperation at ever more
accelerated rates, aiding bottom-up strategies of organization."


=Excerpt=

==Introduction==

Kingsley Dennis:

"Technologies and strategies of cooperation are increasingly invested as deliberate
social actions mediated through innovations in information communication technologies.

The new networks and interrelations of connectivity and information provided by
technology are contributing to a more bottom-up, and distributed, form of civil
participation. In this context, aspects of global civil society are facilitated by complex
interrelationships of shared informational mobility, such as mobile mapping*citizen
cartography *and online social bookmarking applications. In this article I discuss
‘technologies of civil society’ whereby an increasing number of people who are investing
in information-access, increased mobility and knowledge-sharing contribute to multiple
networks of co-participation and cooperation.

I begin by addressing global civil society and how it can be analyzed within complex
flows of information and mobile connectivity. Secondly, I examine the new scapes of
mobility and social connectivity that are largely driven by user-created applications and
which foster a potential social restructuring through shifting patterns in technological
applications and user participation, such as citizen cartography. Thirdly, I focus on specific
technologies of cooperation that mediate communications and collaboration between
people in physical-digital scapes. Finally, this article examines how communication-
mediated forms of civil participation in China are being hampered, sabotaged and banned
by the hierarchical top-down state structure of the Chinese authorities, and how this
contrasts with the more open-access models presented in this article."


[[Category:Civil Society]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Technology]]