'''* Report : Could 3D Printing Change the World? Technologies, Potential, and Implications of [[Additive Manufacturing]]. By Thomas Campbell,  Christopher Williams, et al. Atlantic Council. Strategic foresight INITIATIVE. October 2011.''' 

URL = http://www.acus.org/files/publication_pdfs/403/101711_ACUS_3DPrinting.PDF

=Description=

"AM builds products layer-bylayer—
additively—rather than by subtracting material from
a larger piece of material like cutting out a landing gear
from a block of titanium—that is, “subtractive”
manufacturing. This seemingly small distinction—adding
rather than subtracting—means everything.

• Assembly lines and supply chains can be reduced
or eliminated for many products. The final
product—or large pieces of a final product like a
car—can be produced by AM in one process
unlike conventional manufacturing in which
hundreds or thousands of parts are assembled.
And those parts are often shipped from dozens of
factories from around the world—factories which
may have in turn assembled their parts from parts
supplied by other factories.

• Designs, not products, would move around the
world as digital files to be printed anywhere by any
printer that can meet the design parameters. The
Internet first eliminated distance as a factor in
moving information and now AM eliminates it for the
material world. Just as a written document can be
emailed as a PDF and printed in 2D, an “STL”
design file can be sent instantly to the other side of
the planet via the Internet and printed in 3D.

• Products could be printed on demand without the
need to build-up inventories of new products and
spare parts.

• A given manufacturing facility would be capable of
printing a huge range of types of products without
retooling—and each printing could be customized
without additional cost.

• Production and distribution of material products
could begin to be de-globalized as production is
brought closer to the consumer.

• Manufacturing could be pulled away from
“manufacturing platforms” like China back to the
countries where the products are consumed,
reducing global economic imbalances as export
countries’ surpluses are reduced and importing
countries’ reliance on imports shrink.

• The carbon footprint of manufacturing and
transport as well as overall energy use in
manufacturing could be reduced substantially and
thus global “resource productivity” greatly
enhanced and carbon emissions reduced.

• Reduced need for labor in manufacturing could be
politically destabilizing in some economies while
others, especially aging societies, might benefit
from the ability to produce more goods with fewer
people while reducing reliance on imports.

• The United States, the current leader in AM
technology, could experience a renaissance in
innovation, design, IP exports, and manufacturing,
enhancing its relative economic strength and
geopolitical influence."


=Discussion=


==The Future of Additive Manufacturing==

"Recent reports and developments suggest that AM
development is gaining momentum and could be reaching
a take-off point within the next decade. Hints of the future in
a recent Economist, cover story, “Print me a Stradivarius,”
captured imaginations throughout the policy world.5 A 2010
Ganter report6 identified 3D Printing as transformational
technology in the Technology Trigger phase of the Hype
Cycle7 (i.e., only 5-10 years from mass adoption). 

While those involved in AM research might argue that it instead is
emerging from a “Trough of Disillusionment” towards a
“Slope of Enlightenment,” two recent significant advances
have ignited broad interest in AM:

• Direct Metal AM: Significant improvements in the
direct additive manufacture of metal components
have been made in the past five years. Engineers
are now able to fabricate fully-functional
components from titanium and various steel alloys
featuring material properties that are equivalent to
their traditionally manufactured counterparts. As
these technologies continue to improve, we will
witness greater industrial adoption of AM for the
creation of end use artifacts.

• Desktop-scale 3D Printers: As direct metal AM is
breaking longstanding technology acceptance
barrier related to materials, the recent emergence
of desktop-scale 3D printers is eliminating cost
barriers.8 Thanks to expiring intellectual property
and the open-source (and crowd-source) nature of
these projects, AM technology can now be
purchased for around $1,000. Because of this low
price point, interest in 3D Printing has skyrocketed
as more and more hobbyists are able to interact
with a technology that, in the past, was relegated to
large design and manufacturing firms. This has
democratized manufacturing, thus resembling the
early stages of the Apple I’s impact on
personal computing.

Thus, the 3D printing revolution is occurring at both the high
end and the low end, and converging toward the middle.

One end of the technology spectrum involves expensive
high-powered energy sources and complex scanning
algorithms. The other end is focused on reducing the
complexity and cost of a well-established AM process to
bring the technology to the masses. Major advances will
continue to be made in both directions in the next five
years. “Direct metal” processes will continue to advance as
process control and our understanding of fundamental
metallurgy improves. These cutting-edge technologies will
gain broader acceptance and use in industrial applications
as the necessary design and manufacturing standards
emerge. On the other hand, the quality and complexity of
parts created by the desktop-machines will continue to
improve while the cost declines. These systems will also
see broader dissemination in the next 5 years—first through
school classrooms and then into homes. While these two
technical paths will continue to develop separately—with
seemingly opposing end goals—we can expect to see a
convergence, in the form of a small-scale direct metal 3D
printer, in the next few decades."
(http://www.acus.org/files/publication_pdfs/403/101711_ACUS_3DPrinting.PDF)


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Articles]]