
'''* Article: The Death of Hegemony: How Technology is Shifting International Relations. By John R. Dreyer.'''

URL = [https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/36447565/Dreyer%20-%20Technology%20%26%20the%20Death%20of%20Hegemony.pdf]

=Abstract=

"Technology and governance go hand in hand, especially when on a global scale. History offers
examples of hegemonic powers using technology as a backbone for continued economic and
territorial expansion. In the 21st century technology is undergoing a shift in how it is developed
and used. In this paper I examine technology from a global governance perspective and how
technology is undermining the idea of hegemony. Hegemony is the use of economics, culture
and other perks of a powerful state, backed by the use of force, to create a sphere of influence
that ultimately benefits the hegemonic state. The continuing development of technology that
allow states, groups and individuals to spread economics and culture on a scale that is removed
from the hegemonic state is contributing toward an erosion of the very idea of hegemony on an
international scale. The first part of the paper develops a theory based on A Thousand Plateaus
that advances the concept of the rhizome as a way of understanding how new technologies will
influence how the hegemon dies.  Practical applications of this will be outlined in the second
part of the paper, including such things as cloud computing, artificial islands, bacteria as fuel
and other examples of recent developments. Technology is becoming more local, more
grassroots. Local governments and individuals no longer need a hegemonic power to influence
their culture or develop their economy; technology enables local people to do this themselves.
Technology erodes the ability of a state to build and maintain hegemony."


=Excerpt=

John R. Dreyer:

"The decline of the hegemon is expressed through the concept of radical democracy, which is a
deepening and expansion of the democratic ideal10.  Here Marxist and Gramscian ideas are reformulated
into a post‐modern ideal of counter hegemony versus the prevailing concepts of the liberal democratic
state. Radical democracy dismantles the single, unified space of hegemony and replaces it with a
plurality of spaces that strive to unify into a single totality. The state can no longer represent the
explosive increase new and radically different political spaces. The old hegemony can no longer control
the new groups, the new interests that are different yet united by the logic of equivalence. With
equivalence the different groups in their different political spaces see their pursuits take on an equal air
despite being different struggles. The old hegemony is replaced with a new hegemony that is spread out
amongst diverse groups, struggling for different goals but yet all equal in their importance.

What Laclau and Mouffe describe is a post‐modern hegemony; one that allows the information
revolution into the political sphere and allows it to “go wild”. Benjamin Arditi takes Laclau and Mouffe’s
ideas into the realm of technology through the basic thesis that hegemony, through technology, can
create links between disparate elements of society11. The hegemonic sphere encourages discipline, and
in forming a counter hegemony, Arditi posits the possibility of technology as a multiplier in forming a
successful counter hegemony and the formation of radical democracy. Such specific elements such as
social networking are worked into Arditi’s argument as products of purely intellectual labor. Articulation
is the major task of politics and with such specific technologies as social networking politics can go viral,
meaning that political messages will spread through networks and social groups as if it were a virus. A
major product of this, believes Arditi, is electronic social disobedience.  Size matters far less than the
ability for a consensus to form based on the logic of equivalence of the groups in involved.  

Here we distill hegemony down to the multitude, the great masses of people who take an active part in
the counter hegemonic thrust to dissolve the present government and replace it with a government that
takes into account the logic of equivalence of the multiple spheres of political space.  The multitude is
an important concept in both the idea of radical democracy and in the theories of counter‐hegemony.
First conceived by Deleuze and Guattari in their work A Thousand Plateaus as an expression of a new
philosophy, the concept of multitude is based on the singularities of thought where like minded
individuals construct spheres of interest that, eventually, join into one. Deleuze and Guattari use the
example of the rhizome as the basis of this concept of multitude; a root expanding in all directions from
different sources.  Hardt and Negri take this idea into the political sphere by constructing the idea of
empire and multitude.  This conception of empire serves to colonize and interconnect far more areas
of life and society than the British could even dream of. While Hardt and Negri construct empire as a
negative they encourage they believes it serves as the springboard for the radical democracy and
rhizome as put forward by Laclau and Mouffe and Deleuze and Guattari.  

Technology plays an essential role in this, far beyond the concept of an information revolution or even
Arditi’s viral politics and electronic social disobedience.  The evolution of technology from existing
technology is an important point in the function of how the political and engineering sides of the
argument emerge .  Gradualism offers a theory of how technology maintains an even and slow
evolution over what has been termed “the ancestor species”. This argument is expanded and
furthered by the theory that, indeed, all technologies are combinations from existing technology and
that technology harnesses and exploits some effect or problem.  Another way to look at is that
technology is user driven and satisfies a need rather than a desire to own the technology in question."


==The [[Rhizome]]==

John R. Dreyer:

"Deleuze and Guattari discuss the rhizome, a subterranean stem that is much different from a root19.
Rhizomes are all inclusive, the best and worst, animal or plant; it matters little. The most important part
for our purpose is that rhizomes can be connected to anything other, there is not fixed point like a root
has. Instead the rhizome, as the authors state, establish connections between semiotic chains,
organizations of power and builds relations between the arts, social struggles and the sciences. The
rhizome leads us to the idea of the multiplicity, which is a concept that contains neither a subject nor an
object but instead is composed of determinations, magnitudes and dimensions.  Instead of a single
guide directing the multiplicity, there are connections to what the author’s term as “multiplicity of nerve
fibers”. These connections are indeed the primary girders that hold the rhizome together in the absence
of points or positions.  

The rhizome is made up of connections, yet is not merely a tracing but a map that constructs the
unconscious20. This map is open and it is continuously being modified, re‐mapped, and re‐engineered to
represent different and new connections between the disparate points of the rhizome. Perhaps another
conception of this is of an acentered system; what is termed finite networks in which communications
run from any neighbors to any others.  The channels which allow this are not pre‐existing but instead are
constructed as the communications occur. Further the neighbors and individuals within the systems are
interchangeable. These individuals are defined by the state they are in and it is through this that local
operations can expand worldwide without a central coordinating agency.
  
Here a central point is not a central point. Instead the rhizome connects any point to any other point.
The traits of one point in no way need join to a like point. Instead the traits of various points are mixed
and unmatched.  There is no beginning, no middle and no end to a rhizome; it keeps growing, keeps
connecting disparate points to one another with little thought to organization. The rhizome operates
by variation, expansion, conquest, capture and offshoots. The map of the rhizome is constantly being re‐
drawn, modified, detached, connected, and reversed while always showing new entrances and exits.
Importantly the rhizome is non‐hierarchical and non‐signifying without a leader and without an
organizing memory or central automaton. The rhizome is, as Deleuze and Guattari state, a plateau as
plateaus are always in the middle, neither a beginning nor an end.  A plateau is a continuous, self‐
vibrating region whose development avoids any orientation toward a cumulation point or an external
end.

The rhizome as radical democracy is based on a logic of collective action by elements that challenge the
relation of subordination23. It is the relation of subordination is where the agent is given to the authority
of another, such as an employer. The relation of subordination gives rise to the relation of oppression,
where the relationship is no longer mere authority given down the chain of command but now that
relationship if fraught with antagonism between the parties involved."
(https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/36447565/Dreyer%20-%20Technology%20%26%20the%20Death%20of%20Hegemony.pdf)


==Wither [[Hegemony]]?==

John R. Dreyer:

"Technology is killing hegemony. The hegemonic state builds its power on control: control of culture,
economics, politics and security. This control enables the hegemonic state to build and maintain
influence. Control enables the creation of civil society that succeeds in tying the smaller powers to the
sphere of hegemonic power.  Technology allows individuals and non‐state groups to circumvent the
control of the hegemonic state. These individuals and groups will often be able to filter into the state
itself, drawing it out from under the umbrella of the hegemon.  The creation of data islands and cloud
computing plays a crucial part in the structural deepening of advanced communication in the form of
social networking, sms texting and other peer to peer services. Consequently the ability to form new
institutions through the connection of the rhizome is not just a possibility, but is happening right now.  
The world is becoming decentralized. New centers of innovation are being created in regions that can
support them through locally produced energy and a population that is hungry to join the rest of the
world on the buckboard of digital communication. These centers produce technology that is cheap,
adaptable and, above all, affordable enabling it to become widespread. As more and more capital is
invested in these new centers the hegemonic state begins to see less and less investment.  The
concentration will not happen in any particular state but will be spread around the globe.  The ability to
attract innovation without an extensive infrastructure will drive developing economies.  

The concept of the rhizome is based on the notion of a root spreading out to connect with other roots in
an unorganized, seemingly chaotic fashion. As technology becomes cheaper and more adaptable the
rhizome will experience a growth spurt, a structural deepening that sees the world truly becoming
globalized. Events like the “Twitter Revolution” will not be hindered by a limited user demographic or
government control of communications infrastructure.  As the hegemonic state strengthens their
institutions to deal with these new forms of technology, a gamble to either compete effectively or to
retard progress as much as possible, new roots will form and connect. These will in turn strengthen
existing channels of communication, trade and culture and create new ones specifically designed to
cater to things like cyber‐culture. The rhizome is undermining hegemonic control.  As we see hegemonic
institutions tightening their grip on digital communication technology within the hegemon the incentive
to locate infrastructure elsewhere is increased. The era of hegemony is over ; era of the rhizome is here."
(https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/36447565/Dreyer%20-%20Technology%20%26%20the%20Death%20of%20Hegemony.pdf)


[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Democracy]]

[[Category:Politics]]