'''* Book: Telecommunications Reclaimed: a hands-on guide to networking communities. Edited by Mélanie Dulong de Rosnay and Félix Tréguer. Netcommons, 2020'''

URL = https://www.netcommons.eu/?q=telecommunications-reclaimed [https://www.netcommons.eu/sites/default/files/telecom-reclaimed-web-single-page.pdf pdf]

=Description=

"This book is a guide on how to build a community network, a shared local telecommunications infrastructure, managed as a commons, to access the internet and other digital communications services. It was written collectively by a group of community network pioneers in Europe, activists and researchers during a writing residency week held in Vic, Catalonia in October 2018. It was a time of hard work and fast writing, but also of discussions in a friendly environment.

Meant for a wide audience, the book includes practical knowledge illustrated by several hands-on experiences – a set of 32 real- life stories – as well as legal, technical, governance, economic and policy material extracted from netCommons, a three-year- long research project supported by the European Commission. Its goal is to guide the reader through a set of actions aimed at setting up and fostering the growth of a community network, but also, for policy makers, local administrations and the general public, to create the right conditions to let community networks bloom and flourish."

=More information=

* Belli, L., B. de Souza Ramos, P. Antoniadis, V. Aubrée, R. Baig Viñas, A. Dadoukis, P. Dini, M. Dulong de Rosnay, N. Echániz, K. Heimerl, et al., The community network manual : how to build the Internet yourself, : FGV Direito Rio, 2018.

* Leandro Navarro, F. Freitag, R. Baig-Viñas, and Ramon Roca, "A Commons-oriented Framework for Community Networks", Community Connectivity: Building the Internet from Scratch, Annual Report of the UN IGF Dynamic Coalition on Community Connectivity, GV Direito Rio Edition, 2016.

* Antoniadis, P., J. Martignoni, Leandro Navarro, and P. Dini, Complementary Networks Meet Complementary Currencies: Guifi.net Meets Sardex.net, , pp. 189-222, Submitted.

* Leandro Navarro, F. Freitag, E. Dimogerontakis, R. Baig-Viñas, Ramon Roca, R. Lo Cigno, L. Maccari, P. Antoniadis, M. Michalis, Mélanie Dulong de Rosnay, et al., "Efficient Collaboration between Government, Citizens and Enterprises in Commons Telecommunication Infrastructures", Community Connectivity: Building the Internet from Scratch, Annual Report of the UN IGF Dynamic Coalition on Community Connectivity, GV Direito Rio Edition, 2016.

* Félix Tréguer, "Federating Community Networks: A case study from France", The Community Network Manual: How to Build the Internet Yourself - Official Outcome of the UN IGF Dynamic Coalition on Community Connectivity, Rio de Janeiro, FGV Direito Rio Edition, pp. 159–176, 2018.

* Song, S., C. Rey-Moreno, A. Esterhuysen, M. Jensen, and Leandro Navarro, Introduction: The rise and fall and rise of community networks, , vol. 1: Association for Progressive Communications, nov, 2018.
Baig-Viñas, R., Leandro Navarro, and R. Roca-i-Tió, Multiple Dimensions of Community Network Scalability, , pp. 133-158, Submitted.

* Antoniadis, P., "The Organic Internet as a Resilient Practice", Architecture and Resilience: Interdisciplinary Dialogues, London, Routledge, 2019.

* Antoniadis, P., "The Organic Internet: Building Communications Networks from the Grassroots", Co-Designing Economies in Transition, New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.

* Antoniadis, P., and J. Martignoni, What Could Blockchain do for Community Networks, , pp. 223-248, Submitted.

* Primavera De Filippi, and Félix Tréguer, "Wireless Community Networks: Towards a Public Policy for the Network Commons?", Net Neutrality Compendium: Human Rights, Free Competition and the Future of the Internet: Springer, pp. 261-275, 2016.

* Antoniadis, P., J. Martignoni, R. Baig-Viñas, D. Franquesa, and Leandro Navarro, "Community currencies for community networks", IV International Conference on Social and Complementary Currencies: Money, Consciousness and Values for Social Change, Barcelona, Spain, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, 2017.

* Félix Tréguer, Supporting Community Networks Through Law and Policy – A White Paper, , Barcelona, Spain, 2016.

See also:

* Apostol, I., P. Antoniadis, and T. Raoseta, "The right to the hybrid city: central urban space as a commons", Swiss Inter- and Transdisciplinarity Day 2018: Inter- and Transdisciplinarity in a Digital World, Lausanne, EPFL, 2018.

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:Books]]