'''Telementoring = mentoring through the Internet.'''



=Description=


"Telementoring" provides a unique virtual space where, for the first time in mentoring history, every student with Internet access can have a mentor. '''The International Telementor Program''' (ITP) started in 1995 when David Neils, a software engineer at Hewlett-Packard, created an opportunity for Kruse Elementary School students from Fort Collins, Colorado, to pursue a unique interest in a project-based environment. After four weeks, it became apparent that the only way the students would receive additional mentoring support from HP employees was if the connection was virtual. The employees simply didn't have time to drive miles to and from the school each week. Neils began to use e-mail to make the connection with HP professionals, who were eager to help. The program has now expanded from that one elementary school to more than 550 schools and home-schooling families throughout the United States, Canada, Australia, and Germany.

"ITP's real focus isn't about technology or even telementoring," says Neils, who has continued as the project's director. "It's about helping students redefine learning where success is measured by how effectively the student is leveraging resources at school and home, in the local community, and globally to pursue unique interests. Grades, GPA, and standardized test results become byproducts rather than the focal point."
(http://www.edutopia.org/php/article.php?id=Art_958)


=More Information=

About the International Telementor Program, see http://www.edutopia.org/php/orgs.php?id=org_401781



[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Resources]]