
'''= This document defines ten key rights and principles that must form the basis of Internet governance. They have been compiled by the Internet Rights and Principles Dynamic Coalition ([http://www.irpcharter.org IRP]), an open network of''' individuals and organisations working to uphold human rights in the Internet environment. 


URL = http://internetrightsandprinciples.org/node/397 [http://www.irpcharter.org]
 
 
=Introduction=

The principles are rooted in international human
rights standards, and derive from the coalition's emerging Charter of
Human Rights and Principles for the Internet.
 
The Internet offers unprecedented opportunities for the realisation of
human rights, and plays an increasingly important role in our everyday
lives. It is therefore essential that all actors, both public and
private, respect and protect human rights on the Internet. Steps must
also be taken to ensure that the Internet operates and evolves in ways
that fulfill human rights to the greatest extent possible. 


=Text=

To help realise this vision of a rights-based Internet environment, the 10
Rights and Principles are:
 

'''1) Universality and Equality'''

All humans are born free and equal in dignity and rights, which must
be respected, protected and fulfilled in the online environment.
 

'''2) Rights and Social Justice'''

The Internet is a space for the promotion, protection and fulfilment
of human rights and the advancement of social justice. Everyone has
the duty to respect the human rights of all others in the online environment.
 

'''3) Accessibility'''

Everyone has an equal right to access and use a secure and open Internet.
 

'''4) Expression and Association'''

Everyone has the right to seek, receive, and impart information freely
on the Internet without censorship or other interference. Everyone
also has the right to associate freely through and on the Internet,
for social, political, cultural or other purposes.
 

'''5) Privacy and Data Protection'''

Everyone has the right to privacy online. This includes freedom from
surveillance, the right to use encryption, and the right to online
anonymity. Everyone also has the right to data protection, including
control over personal data collection, retention, processing, disposal and disclosure.
 

'''6) Life, Liberty and Security'''

The rights to life, liberty, and security must be respected, protected
and fulfilled online. These rights must not be infringed upon, or used
to infringe other rights, in the online environment.
 

'''7) Diversity'''

Cultural and linguistic diversity on the Internet must be promoted,
and technical and policy innovation should be encouraged to facilitate plurality of expression.
 

'''8) Network Equality'''

Everyone shall have universal and open access to the Internet's
content, free from discriminatory prioritisation, filtering or traffic
control on commercial, political or other grounds.
 

'''9) Standards and Regulation'''

The Internet's architecture, communication systems, and document and
data formats shall be based on open standards that ensure complete
interoperability, inclusion and equal opportunity for all.
 

'''10) Governance'''

Human rights and social justice must form the legal and normative
foundations upon which the Internet operates and is governed. This
shall happen in a transparent and multilateral manner, based on
principles of openness, inclusive participation and accountability.
 

=More Information=
 
Get involved with developing the IRP Charter at www.irpcharter.org,
follow us at @netrights on Twitter or join the Internet Rights and
Principles Facebook group.


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Policy]]