

=Example=

"Rochdale Boroughwide Housing 
has created the first tenant- and employee-owned
mutual. This now owns the 13 700 homes previously
owned by Rochdale Council. Tenants and employees
elect their own representatives to a representative
body, which also includes appointed representatives
of certain key organisations. The representative body
does not run the organisation, but it helps to set the
framework (business plan and strategy) within which
the Board of Directors is required to run the organisation."

=Source=

* Article: Going with the grain: organising for a purpose. By Cliff Mills and Gareth Swarbrick. London Journal of Primary Care 2014;6:3–7

"The traditional state-owned model of public services
is coming to an end. The search for a new
model benefits from reflection on the historical
background, and an understanding of the broader
context of concepts of public service. Modern
mutuals seek both to provide a new basis for public
ownership and an organisational model which
underpins a redesigned service delivery model aimed
at securing today’s desired outcomes.

We strongly believe in the concept of public services,
but recognise that the historic model of state
ownership is being dismantled. A clear new model is
needed which is committed to public benefit, and
which offers a strong and cogent alternative to
private investor ownership. We believe that the ideas
and principles underpinning traditional mutuality
are highly relevant to the development of modern
public services, and for this reason we are passionate
about the need for modern mutualism to be explained
and understood.

In looking at reform, it is important to understand
the longer heritage of the public sector. This suggests
a future drawing on mutual ideas and principles
as a powerful alternative to private ownership. It
involves a new approach to organisational design
which underpins a reformed service delivery model.

This is examined through the example of Rochdale
Boroughwide Housing, the UK’s first mutual social
housing provider, owned and controlled by its
tenant and employee members."


[[Category:Housing]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:UK]]