
'''TenFour is an audio and video podcasting channel for work exploring the cultural and the political dimensions of digital media.''' It is a project of the Honors in Multimedia Scholarship program at the University of Southern California's Institute for Multimedia Literacy.

URL = http://iml104info.blogspot.com/2006/02/best-of-tenfour.html


=Catalog=

Copied on May 2, 2006.

"Below is a curated selection of some of the most interesting TenFour broadcasts... 


Podcast: An Interview with Mark Frauenfelder 
Pierson Clair talks to Mark Frauenfelder about his work with Boing Boing and Make: Magazine. Broadcast date: 4/29/2006.

Podcast: An Interview with Jonathan McIntosh 
Pierson Clair discusses political remixes, open source, and IndyMedia with Jonathan McIntosh. Broadcast date: 4/29/2006.

Videocast: Teaching an Old 'Toon New Tricks 
Seth Gullion's Creative Commons Remix Video, which mashes up old cartoons with a Lawrence Lessig lecture. Broadcast date: 4/17/2006.

Podcast: "Into the Depths of Facebook" 
Internet walking tour about Facebook. Broadcast date: 3/9/2006.

Videocast: Media Giant: A Fairytale 
Once upon a time in a land not so far away a young lady named Snow Charlotte decided to make her own media, but the evil Lord of Disney, Robert Iger, wanted to control the most media of them all. Broadcast date: 2/28/2006.

Videocast: "Success 2.0" 
Part 1 of "The Culture Industry in 60secs," a series of four animated videocasts. Seth explores how we measure success within Web 2.0 culture. Broadcast date: 2/13/2006.

Videocast: Free Your Music 
Sam Ghods teaches us how to spot and avoid restrictive Digital Rights Management. Broadcast date: 1/12/2006.

Podcast: An Interview with Henry Jenkins 
Andy Hogan interviews MIT Professor Henry Jenkins about the cultural and ideological climate surrounding video games. Broadcast: 12/12/2005

Podcast: Tracked by the Amazon 
Sam Ghods explores privacy and Amazon.com. Broadcast: 11/30/2005

Podcast: Fly Like an Eagle 
Sonia Seetharaman explores the Internet as a research tool, teaching critical skills for finding and distributing information. Broadcast: 11/29/2005

Videocast: Giving Youth a Voice? Or Just a Little Duck? 
Lindsay Pond examines the extent to which the ability of young people to express themselves through media is influenced by adult perspectives. Broadcast: 11/09/2005

Videocast: The New York Surveillance Camera Players 
Sam Ghods explores surveillance cameras, privacy, and the role of this activist organization. Broadcast 11/06/2005

Videocast: A Needle in a Haystack 
Sonia Seetharaman analyzes folksonomy and social bookmarking tools in relation to traditional library systems. Broadcast: 11/06/2005"

[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]