
=Bio=

"Dr. Lessidrenska is a recognized expert, author, researcher, trainer of trainers and practitioner in the field of sustainable development and sustainable and integrated business development. She is a President and a Senior Partner of E3 Collaborative LLC, USA, responsible for a portfolio of projects involving organizational assessment, strategic and technical advice, training, and hands-on assistance in sustainable business (CSR), responsible governance, organizational and business development, sustainability and integrated reporting and thinking to large and small enterprises and institutions globally with a focus on emerging economies. As an Executive Business Ethics at Globethics.net (www.globethics.net), a Swiss foundation based in Geneva, Switzerland, Dr. Lessidrenska currently leads a number of business ethics programs, including the development of an innovative Value-Based Enterprise Certificate for Sustainability in China.

Dr. Lessidrenska is one of the founding members of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) (www.globalreporting.org), starting in 1999 in Boston, USA, and later working as a GRI Regional Networks and Stakeholder Engagement Director at the GRI Secretariat established in Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Since 2005 she continues to serve as a GRI Associate and independent consultant and contributes for the growing GRI and sustainability uptake in Russia, Eastern and Southern Europe, Africa and Latin America. Among her clients are: UNDP and the World Bank/IFC Global Corporate Governance Forum (GCGF); as well as Serena Group Luxury Hotels and Lodges, Kenya; Akbank, Turkey; Sevrostal, Russia, JSC Gazprom Neft and its subsidiary and affiliate companies, Russia; Triodos Bank, the Netherlands and associated with Triodos Bank group of Micro Financial Banks in Uganda, Nicaragua, Peru, Kenya, and Mongolia. Dr. Lessidrenska is a co-author with Prof. Judge Mervyn King of the recently published book „Transient caretakers – how to make the life on Earth sustainable”, Pan Macmillan. She has sat on advisory boards and lectured in North America, Europe and Africa as part of development, implementation and integration of sustainability in the academic education. Currently she serves as a Board Member at Earth Focus Foundation and SEEDS, both based in Switzerland. Born in Sofia, Bulgaria, she holds a PhD in Chemical Engineering and Environmental Management."

=More Information=

#lessidrenska@globalreporting.org
#Lessidrenska@globethics.net 
#Tel (office, Globethics.net): +41 (0) 227916267 / Mobile: +41 (0) 797922452


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Bulgaria]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]