

Also called "Terms of Service". The contracts you sign in order to use websites, most of the time without reading them.


=Examples=

Collated by Fox News in February 2009, who calls them "Terms of Enslavement":

"Gmail: "Google reserves the right (but shall have no obligation) to pre-screen, review, flag, filter, modify, refuse or remove any or all Content from any Service."

LinkedIn: "You do not have to submit anything to us, but if you choose to submit something (including any User generated content, ideas, concepts, techniques and data), you must grant, and you actually grant by concluding this Agreement, a nonexclusive, irrevocable, worldwide, perpetual, unlimited, assignable, sublicenseable, fully paid up and royalty free right to us to copy, prepare derivative works of, improve, distribute, publish, remove, retain, add, and use and commercialize, in any way now known or in the future discovered, anything that you submit to us, without any further consent, notice and/or compensation to you or to any third parties.

"You have to indemnify us and hold us harmless from any damages, losses and costs (including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees) related to third party claims, charges or investigations, caused by (a) your failure to comply with this Agreement, including, without limitation, your submission of content that violates third party rights or applicable laws, (b) any content you submit to LinkedIn or (c) any activity in which you engage on or through the LinkedIn."

Included in LinkedIn's mile-long list of user "DON'T'S": "Access, reload or 'refresh' or make any other request to transactional servers more than once during any three second interval.

"Adds to a content field content that is not intended for such field (i.e. submitting a telephone number in the "title" or any other field)."

Monster.com: You give up the rights to your resume when you post it on the job-hunting site:

"You understand and acknowledge that you have no ownership rights in your MyMonster Account, and that if you cancel your MyMonster Account, all your account information from Monster, including resumes, Profiles, cover letters, network contacts, saved jobs, questionnaires and email mailing lists, will be marked as deleted in Monster's databases and will be removed from any public area of the Monster Sites. Information may continue to be available for some period of time because of delays in propagating such deletion through Monster's web servers. In addition, third parties may retain cached copies of your Information."

Apple iTunes: If you're an American, you can't legally use or access the iTunes Store or AppStore from outside the United States (other countries have similar rules):

"U.S. ONLY. The Service is available to you only in the United States and is not available in any other location. You agree not to use or attempt to use the Service from outside of the available territory. Apple may use technologies to verify such compliance."

YouTube will hold on to your videos forever, even if you delete them from the site:

"For clarity, you retain all of your ownership rights in your User Submissions. However, by submitting User Submissions to YouTube, you hereby grant YouTube a worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty-free, sublicenseable and transferable license to use, reproduce, distribute, prepare derivative works of, display, and perform the User Submissions in connection with the YouTube Website and YouTube's (and its successors' and affiliates') business, including without limitation for promoting and redistributing part or all of the YouTube Website (and derivative works thereof) in any media formats and through any media channels. You also hereby grant each user of the YouTube Website a non-exclusive license to access your User Submissions through the Website, and to use, reproduce, distribute, display and perform such User Submissions as permitted through the functionality of the Website and under these Terms of Service. The above licenses granted by you in User Videos terminate within a commercially reasonable time after you remove or delete your User Videos from the YouTube Website. You understand and agree, however, that YouTube may retain, but not display, distribute, or perform, server copies of User Submissions that have been removed or deleted."

AOL Instant Messenger: "You may use AIM Products for lawful purposes only. You may not post on or transmit through community areas (e.g., message boards, chat, e-mail, calendars, instant messaging products) or other means any material that (1) violates or infringes in any way upon the rights of others, (2) is unlawful, threatening, abusive, defamatory, invasive of privacy or publicity rights, vulgar, obscene, profane, indecent or otherwise objectionable...."

And AOL owns everything you post in public places — and it can pass on your information to as many companies it wants without letting you know:

"You or the owner of the Content retain ownership of all right, title and interest in Content that you post to public areas of any AIM Product. However, by submitting or posting Content to public areas of AIM Products (for example, posting a message on a message board or submitting your picture for the "Rate-A-Buddy" feature), you grant AOL, its parent, affiliates, subsidiaries, assigns, agents and licensees the irrevocable, perpetual, worldwide right to reproduce, display, perform, distribute, adapt and promote this Content in any medium. Once you submit or post Content to any public area on an AIM Product, AOL does not need to give you any further right to inspect or approve uses of such Content or to compensate you for any such uses."

Microsoft Windows Live: WindowsLive's Code of Conduct applies to most of MSN's content-sharing services, including all of those new 'network' and 'profile' pages that pop up when you sign onto Hotmail:

"You will not upload, post, transmit, transfer, distribute or facilitate distribution of any content (including text, images, sound, video, data, information or software) or otherwise use the service in a way that:

"Depicts nudity of any sort including full or partial human nudity or nudity in non-human forms such as cartoons, fantasy art or manga.

"Incites, advocates, or expresses pornography, obscenity, vulgarity, profanity, hatred, bigotry, racism, or gratuitous violence.

"Promotes or otherwise facilitates the purchase and sale of ammunition or firearms."

"Microsoft reserves the right at all times to disclose any information as Microsoft deems necessary to satisfy any applicable law, regulation, legal process or governmental request, or to edit, refuse to post or to remove any information or materials, in whole or in part, in Microsoft's sole discretion."

Yahoo: You agree to not use the Yahoo! Services to:

"Upload, post, email, transmit or otherwise make available any Content that is unlawful, harmful, threatening, abusive, harassing, tortuous, defamatory, vulgar, obscene, libelous, invasive of another's privacy, hateful, or racially, ethnically or otherwise objectionable...."

Yahoo Video: "You retain ownership to Your Content that You submit for inclusion into the Service. However, by submitting Your Content to Yahoo!, You hereby grant Yahoo! and its affiliates the following worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, sublicensable and transferable rights and licenses:

"To host, cache, store, archive, index, crawl, create algorithms based on, modify or transcode Your Content to appropriate media formats, standards or mediums as part of the Service;

"To use, distribute, reproduce, modify, remix, excerpt, adapt, prepare derivative works and compilations of, publicly perform and publicly display Your Content on the Service, on any Yahoo! property or in connection with any distribution or syndication arrangement thereof with third parties or third-party sites, in any media format or medium and through any media channels; and c. to use Your Content for and in connection with advertising, promotional or commercial purposes, including without limitation, the right to publicly display, perform, reproduce and distribute Your Content in any media format or medium and through any media channels."

Snapfish, the photo-sharing network, doesn't have to remove your photos just because you've asked it to:

"If you request cancellation of your account, Snapfish may (but is not required to) remove any and all content (photos) or other personal information from the Snapfish site, and your photos may not be accessible to you even if you choose to rejoin or reactivate your account at a later date. Information necessary for the purposes of maintaining business records regarding a cancelled account, including records of credit transactions and account ownership, will be retained in accordance with applicable law."

Tumblr: You can get booted for bullying:

"The blogging site just updated its content policy by tacking on a harassment clause—and put a freeze on the accounts of five mean members."

Verizon Fios says no to porn:

"They'll pull the plug if they catch you using their service "in a manner that is obscene, sexually explicit, cruel or racist in nature or which espouses, promotes or incites bigotry, hatred or racism."
(http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,496766,00.html)



=Key Book to Read=


'''Book: Terms of Use: Negotiating the Jungle of the Intellectual Commons, Eva Hemmungs Wirtén.'''

David Bollier:

“Now that scholars have established the value of the public domain, mapped its contours and suggested new ways to conceptualize it (e.g., let’s lose the spatial metaphors), it is refreshing to see “public domain studies” advance in new directions. In her new book, Terms of Use: Negotiating the Jungle of the Intellectual Commons, Eva Hemmungs Wirtén offers up an internationally minded, interdisciplinary meditation on the “intellectual commons.” Wirtén, a professor at Uppsala University in Sweden, is developing a sophisticated new frontier of public domain scholarship.

Not only does she explore the value of the public domain in history, and especially the tensions between industrialized and developing nations; she is comfortable discussing the commons as something distinct from the public domain and isconversant with the subtle, complicated political dilemmas posed by the commons.

Wirtén’s special interest in Terms of Use is the non-western, “undeveloped” world. The “jungle” of the book’s subtitle — “Negotiating the Jungle of the Intellectual Commons” – refers to the “locale of the primitive.” It is a place of biological abundance and vernacular culture, a place that markets have barely penetrated, and a place where the past and the present are intimately connected. Wirtén’s focus on “the jungle” is also meant to highlight the role that imperialist nations have played in mining the “public domain” in pre-modern nations for valuable resources.

Terms of Use starts by recounting the English history of enclosure of rural lands, a history that is paradigmatic for the national and corporate plunder that have occurred in subsequent centuries, including our own. Wirtén then moves on to explore the how pharmaceutical companies are plundering the biodiversity in developing nations to develop lucrative new medicines.

It is revealing to link the original English enclosures with contemporary pharmaceutical enclosures of biodiversity in developing nations. While the means of enclosure differ, the same general principles apply: identify the economic value of the resource, develop new language for describing this “value” while denigrating local and traditional knowledge, and then superimpose this new matrix of “intellectual property” on the social/ecological system that had long functioned as a commons.

I had no idea that the British obsession with botanical gardens in the nineteenth century was intimately connected to that country’s colonial agenda. When scouring the Caribbean, the Indian subcontinent and the Pacific, the Brits developed botanical gardens as a place for saving and replicating the precious seeds and plants that they were seizing for commercial purposes.

This raid of the South by the North has reached the point today, writes Wirtén, that plant genetic material from the less developed regions of the world provide “the base for fully 95.7 percent of the global food crop production.” Yet in 2002, Europe, the U.S. and Japan owned nearly 90 percent of all biotechnology patents filed at the European Patent Office. Intellectual property law is a reflection of the geopolitical power of the industrialized West. It is no accident that IP law has peddled the myth that the public domain has no value — ostensibly because “value” requires money and market activity, and the commons rarely hosts either.

Wirtén usefully explores the neglected underside of “openness” and “freedom” that American progressives champion. She points out, for example, that expansions of the public domain have been highly useful to multinational corporations as they seek to appropriate the genes, ethnobotanical knowledge and cultural works of indigenous cultures. If such resources must be “open” and in the public domain, then the most powerful, resourceful players will be free to appropriate and privatize them as they strive to develop commercial products. This theme has been powerfully explained by Anupam Chander and Madhavi Sunder in a notable 2004 law review article, “The Romance of the Public Domain,” which is recommended reading for anyone interested in this issue.

Similarly, the idea of calling certain global resources the “heritage of mankind” – like oceans, rain forests, the moon and space – seems to be an entirely fair-minded, laudable goal. But making such resources available to all under an open-access regime can, in fact, be quite harmful. It lets anyone exploit the resource, and nobody is empowered to exclude others who may over-exploit or abuse the resource. The dreaded tragedy of the commons results.”
(http://www.onthecommons.org/content.php?id=2287)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:IP]]