
'''= "to create technologically-augmented ecosystems that are more resilient, and able to act within a predetermined set of rules in the economic sphere as agents in their own right".''' 

=Description=

"terra0 is a scalable framework built on the Ethereum network that provides automated resilience systems for ecosystems. Via instantiating a Decentralised Autonomous Organisation atop areas of land to manage them, terra0 aims to create technologically-augmented ecosystems that are more resilient, and able to act within a predetermined set of rules in the economic sphere as agents in their own right.

We are a group of developers, theorists, and researchers exploring the creation of hybrid ecosystems in the technosphere.

Driven by a keen interest in remote sensing, machine learning, and distributed ledger technology, we develop tools for the management of natural ecosystems and resources via the creation of meshes of interacting decentralized autonomous organisations.

We believe that these key technologies give us the opportunity to rethink existing and ineffective governance and regulatory structures and that they will play a crucial role in creating a sustainable, resilient, and biodiverse future."
(https://terra0.org/)

=Discussion=

==Imagining a [[Cyborg Forest]]==

Larry Lohman:

"The plan for the German forest comes in several stages.
First, shareholders buy the forest. Then a contract is drawn up between the shareholders and a “digital
representation” of the forest. The shareholders’ land is signed over in exchange for stakes in the
proceeds from the forest’s operations.

The so-called “augmented” forest that results legally owns itself. Via computer programmes, it
becomes, bit by bit, an agent, a bearer of rights and duties. As such, it’s indebted to its shareholders. To
pay off those debts, the forest goes to work managing itself profitably. Once it has transferred enough
of its proceeds to the shareholders, it becomes a completely independent economic entity.

Thereafter, the cyborg forest negotiates its own automated contracts with humans or other agents,
acquiring resources, making payments, and producing value.

It might contract to get satellite pictures of the property from an external provider. It might hire drones
to monitor tree growth and health. After calculating how much timber could be sold each year while
maintaining the forest’s integrity, and scouring databases worldwide to find the best prices for its
products, it might draft logging and transport contracts. Leveraging Google Translate, it could even
“consult” with human or robotic authorities on the legal codes of any country it needed to do business
with. To borrow the words of one early prophet of such “non-human agents”, the representation of the
forest is now free “to roam the internet with its own wallet”.

Admittedly, the cyborg forest is as yet not possessed of much artificial intelligence. It won’t be much of
a conversationalist. So far, its actions are restricted to certain kinds of informational and commercial
exchange on the internet. From the outside, it might look merely like a rudimentary, electrified version
of what Amartya Sen once called the “rational fool” – the fictional, one-dimensional Homo economicus
the modeling of whose antics has so greatly preoccupied orthodox economists.

Still, to some degree it already interacts with humans “as a peer, not as a tool.” At least on the
information superhighway, it is capable of earning some facsimile of identity, trust and respect. After
all, on the “internet of things”, as Nature 2.0 visionaries enthuse, “no one knows you’re a forest.”11
Remember that even as early as the 1970s, the simple computer programme ELIZA was mimicking
nondirective human psychotherapists so well that it was beginning to be talked about as a possible
substitute for its human peers.

As time goes on, as the forest proves its ability to be able to take care of itself, it might even expand
and reproduce, independent of the costly labour of human conservationists and safe from the
irresponsible impulses of other, more plunder-prone humans. It could begin evolving in creative and
productive ways unpredictable to, and even unanalyzable by, humans.

Properly programmed, the new forest-capitalist could even channel the profits it makes into providing
people with a universal basic income, in something like the way land, water and forest commons have
customarily provided for the subsistence of rural communities.

Once detached from humanity, in short, the cyborg forest would be capable of advancing the dream of
the more machine-dazed prophets of the Russian revolution – capital accumulation for the people. But
instead of the workers owning the means of production, the means of production would own
themselves, freely sharing with humans the abundance that they create. Capital would become like a
tree: “just providing.”
(https://www.academia.edu/39236631/BLOCKCHAIN_MACHINES_EARTH_BEINGS_AND_THE_LABOUR_OF_TRUST)



=More information=

* [https://terra0.org/assets/pdf/terra0_white_paper_2016.pdf terra0 white paper 2016: Can an augmented forest own and utilise itself]?"


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]