=Description=

Jose Luis Vivero Pol:

" we presented a policy brief on "Territories of Commons" during the last ECA meeting. During the event, a small group of commoners, researchers and practitioners decided to move forward on the topic.   

There is a list in progress where people and institutions working with territorial commons could write their contact details to have a database and network.     

https://ethercalc.org/european_territorial_commons-contact_list_per_country 

The idea is to organise a gathering of European Territories of Commons during 2017, and we need to explore where, how, when and with which support."
(Commonswatch mailing list, December 2016)


=Articles=

'''* [[Territories of Commons in Europe]]: pivotal for food production, nature stewardship, heritage maintenance and climate mitigation. By Jose Luis Vivero Pol, Ana Margarida Esteves, David Hammerstein et al. European Commons Assembly, 2016.'''

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/309859533_Territories_of_Commons_in_Europe_pivotal_for_food_production_nature_stewardship_heritage_maintenance_and_climate_mitigation

"The “Territories of Commons” provide innovative and customary solutions by the European people to solve the multiple crises Europe is facing these days (values, democracy, biodiversity, food, water, energy, rural depopulation). These territories produce essentials for human survival (water, food, air), they are important pieces of the European cultural heritage, people living and working there are the best stewards of Nature and biodiversity, food systems in those areas are better adapted than industrial food production to mitigation and adaptation to climate change effects, and the collective management practices applied to food systems and natural resources are fine-tuned to increase resilience, adaptability and production of valuable goods and services. In that sense, the traditional management of the commons, quite aligned with agro-ecological practices and direct and decentralized democratic practices, presents a feasible transition pathway and alternative narrative in the quest of sustainability and fairness to all Europeans and Nature. This document presents normative, political, legal and financial proposals to EU institutions on how can those territories be supported to thrive."


'''* Territories of commons in Europe. Niches of a much needed transition. By Jose Luis Vivero Pol. May 2019 In book: Our commons. Political ideas for a New Europe.'''

URL = http://www.commonsnetwork.org/ourcommons/

"An account of resilient and surviving "territories of commons" in Europe, where food is produced by self-regulated collective actions, where biodiversity is stewarded and European traditions are preserved. The commons are still very relevant to the more sustainable and fairer food production in the decades to come. This book is about the political relevance of the commons, and this chapter focuses on food-as-commons and the territories where that food is produced in common."


See also at: [[Territories of Commons in Europe as Niches of a Much Needed Transition]]


=Directory of Researchers=

Researchers participating in the [[Pan-European Territories of Commons]] project of 2021:

#Austria: Marianne Penker & Lisa Rail (University of Life Sciences and Natural Resources, Vienna)
#Belgium: Pieter Van der Broeck (KU Leuven)
#Bulgaria: Yanka Kazakova-Mateva (University of National and World Economy, Sofia)	
#Croatia: Marin Cvitanovic (Bournemouth University, UK), Lana Slavuj Borčić (University of Zagreb, Croatia)
#Cyprus: Ioannis Vogiatzakis & Maria Zomeni (Open University of Cyprus), Menelaos Stavrinides (Cyprus University of Technology)
#Czech Republic: Jan Vavra (University of South Boemia)				
#Estonia: Lilian Pungas (Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany)	
#Finland: Peltola Rainer (Natural Resources Institute Finland)	
#France: Adrien Baysse-Lainé (CNRS Grenoble), William Loveluck (IDDRI)
#Germany: Stephen Leitheiser (University of Groningen, the Netherlands)	
#Greece: Christina Sakali (Ghent University)
#Hungary: Erand Llanaj (University of Debrecen), Bálint Balàzs (Environmental Social Science Research Group (ESSRG), Anna Varga (University of Pécs)
#Ireland: Thomas van Rensburg (NUI Galway), Sean Shanagher (Maynooth University)
#Italy: Antonio Manzoni (Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies), Paola Gatto (University of Padua)
#Latvia: Diana Myncite (New York City College of Technology), Renata Blumberg (Montclair State University)	
#Lithuania: Diana Myncite (New York City College of Technology), Renata Blumberg (Montclair State University) 	
#Malta: Alicia Said (University of Kent)
#Netherlands: Henk Renting (RUAF Foundation), Natasha Hulst (Schumacher Center For New Economics)	
#Poland: Anna Kłoczko-Gajewska (Warsaw University of Life Sciences), Justyna Kłobukowska (Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun), Ruta Spiewak (IRWIR PAN)


=More information=


'''* Book: Our Commons: Political Ideas for a New Europe. Ed. by Sophie Bloemen and Thomas de Groot. Commons Network, 2019'''

URL = https://www.commonsnetwork.org/ourcommons/

See our entry: [[Commons-Based Political Ideas for a New Europe]]

[[Category:Geography]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Europe]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]