
'''* Book: The Territorial Imperative: A Personal Inquiry Into the Animal Origins of Property and Nations. Robert Ardrey. 1966'''

URL = https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Territorial_Imperative


=Description=

"A 1966 nonfiction book by American writer Robert Ardrey. It describes the evolutionarily determined instinct among humans toward territoriality and the implications of this territoriality in human meta-phenomena such as property ownership and nation building.

The Territorial Imperative develops the theses originally introduced in African Genesis: A Personal Investigation into the Animal Origins and Nature of Man, which was published five years earlier. In African Genesis, Ardrey posited that man originated in Africa instead of Asia, that he is driven by inherited instincts to acquire land and defend territory, and that the development of weapons was a fundamental turning point in his evolution.[2] The Territorial Imperative further explores these ideas with a special emphasis on man's distinct preoccupation with the concept of territory. It goes on to elucidate the role that inherited evolutionary instinct, particularly the so-called "territorial imperative", plays in modern human society in phenomena such as property ownership and nation building.

The Territorial Imperative caused significant scientific and popular controversy. In it Ardrey restated and developed his challenge to the reigning methodological assumption of the social sciences, that human behavior is fundamentally distinct from animal behavior. As he writes in The Territorial Imperative, "The dog barking at you from behind his master's fence acts for a motive indistinguishable from that of his master when the fence was built."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Territorial_Imperative)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]