For a list of pages see [[:Category:Thailand]].

Related material is available in our [[Thai-Language]] section.

Check out the delicious Tag [http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/P2P-Thailand P2P-Thailand]


==Events==

*[http://barcampbangkok.org/ Bar Camp Bankgok]: Winter 2008 [http://www.technorati.com/search/barcampbangkok?authority=n&language=n]

==Free Software==
* [http://linux.thai.net/ Linux.Thai.Net] - the very first portal of Thai Linux users/developers
* [http://linux.thai.net/planet/ Planet TLWG] - life and works of Thai Linux people
* [http://www.itdestination.com/ MyComputer Training Center] - Training center in Bangkok. Offering the Linux/Opensource Software training courses, community support and useful resources.
* [http://www.opentle.org/ Linux TLE] - NECTEC sponsored Ubuntu based distribution of Linux.  Installation & configuration is Thai.

==Digital Content==

* [http://cc.in.th/ Creative Commons Thailand] - port the CC license to Thailand jurisdiction. The (draft of) ported licenses are available in [http://cc.in.th/wiki/ wiki].
* [http://fuse.in.th/ Fuse] - portal/repository of Thai creative works (shortfilms, animations, music, novel, etc.) licensed in CC.
* [http://duocore.tv/ DuocoreTV] -  Thai Video Podcass that updates new information techonology trends from global to Thai IT Industry.
* [http://fanrosana.com/ Fanrosana] The promotion of political campaign for senate election

==Miscellaneous==  

* [http://nokkrob.org/ Nokkrob] - (นอกกรอบ - ''out of the frame'') Investigates decentralized and self-organizing systems; about 10% of the content is in English.
* [http://facthai.wordpress.com/ Freedom Against Censorship Thailand] - Thai advocacy group against the censorship
* Social bookmarking communities: [http://www.siamcollective.com/ Siam Collective]; [http://zickr.com/ Zickr], [http://duocore.tv/ Duocore]
* [http://fringer.org/ Fringer]  - Free articles and slides shared on areas of free movement Information.
* [http://cubiccreative.org/ Cubic Creative] - A Group of highschool students from the Satit Kaset High School create social projects for teens.
[[Category:Asia]]
* [http://www.ideabangkok.com/ Idea Bangkok]  - A prototype crowdsourcing tool for the purpose of aggregating ideas for improving Bangkok
* [http://www.green.in.th/blog/business/ Green.in.th]  - Update Green trends in Thai.
* [http://ilaw.or.th/ideas/ Ilaw.or.th]  -  A crowdsoucing tool for the purpose of aggregating ideas for improving a Thai law.
* [http://www.libraryhub.in.th/ Libraryhub]  - A hub for libralians'conection and knowledge.
* [http://www.changkhui.com/ ChangKhui] - A Thai podcast for Thai people to learn ideas from experts in different area.
* [http://www.zadzad.com/zadzad]

[[Category:Thailand]]
[[Category:Country]]
[[Category:Asia]]