
=Directory 2: Thematic Approaches on Civilizational History=


==Thread 7: The P2P/Commons View==

See also our two structured bibliographies:

* [[What You Should Read To Understand the Commons]]

* [[Sources of P2P Theory]]

Books, read and recommended:

* [[Beyond Civilization]]: The World's Four Great Streams of Civilization: Their Achievements, Their Differences and Their Future. Keith Chandler. Rivendell Publishing Company, 1992

*  The [[Structure of World History]]: From Modes of Production to Modes of Exchange. by Kojin Karatani. Duke University Press, 2014 [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Evolution_of_the_Structure_of_World_History_Through_Modes_of_Exchange]

*  Karl Polanyi. The [[Great Transformation]]. (1944)

* Jean Gebser. The [[Ever-Present Origin]].

* Ecological Revolution: The [[Political Origins of Environmental Degradation and the Environmental Origins of Axial Religions]]; China, Japan, Europe. by Mark D. Whitaker

* R. I. Moore. The [[First European Revolution]], c. 970-1215. Oxford and New York: Blackwell Publishers, 2000

* [[Rethinking the World]]. By Peter Pogany. [https://integralpermaculture.wordpress.com/peter-pogany/]

* Lawrence Taub. The [[Spiritual Imperative]]: Sex, Age, and Caste Move the Future. [http://www.spiritualimperative.com]

* [[How the Irish Saved Civilization]]. The Untold Story of Ireland's Heroic Role from the Fall of Rome to the Rise of Medieval Europe. by Thomas Cahill. Bantam-Doubleday-Dell, 1995



==Thread 8: Single Volume Treatments==

* Rushton Coulborn. The [[Origin of Civilized Societies]]. (1959)
* The [[Fate of Empires]]. John Bagot Glubb
*  The [[Human Web]]: A Bird's-Eye View of World History. by J. R. McNeill (Author, Georgetown University), William H McNeill. Norton', 2003 [https://wwnorton.com/books/9780393925685]: a history of the formation of the cosmopolitan web, the communication's technologies that allow increasing interaction and integration of human communities up to the planetary scale.
* Melko, M. (1969). The [[Nature of Civilizations]]. Boston, Mass: Porter Sargent
* [[Civilizations and Historical Patterns]]. An Approach to the Comparative Study of History. Neagu Djuvara. Humanitas, 1975 (1st ed. in French) [https://humanitas.ro/humanitas/ebook/civilizations-and-historical-patterns]: "In the shadow of the major civilization, before it disappeared in its turn, how many other cultures have perished without a trace?"

==Thread 9: Understanding the Dark Side==

Here we will discuss authors such as Rene Girard and Georges Bataille, and others such as 'Traditionalist' authors, who reject modernity as such.

===The authors===


===='''Georges Bataille'''====

*Book: The  [[Accursed Share]]: An Essay on General Economy.


===='''Alexander Bard'''==== 

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Bard]; contemporary exponent of a 'Dark Renaissance', mostly Nietzschean.

* Books: 
** 1) The Netocrats, with Jan Söderqvist (2000); 
** 2) The Global Empire, with Jan Söderqvist (2002) 
** 3) The Body Machines, with Jan Söderqvist (2009) ; 
** 4) [[Syntheism]] – Creating God in the Internet Age, with Jan Söderqvist (2014) 
** 5) Digital Libido - Sex, power and violence in the network society, with Jan Söderqvist (2018)
** The Futurica Trilogy, with Jan Söderqvist (2012), contains books 1 to 3 above
* Videos: 
** 1) [[Alexander Bard on the Digital Class Struggle in the 21st Century]] ; 
** 2) [[Alexander Bard on Syntheism and the Paths Ahead for Spirituality in the 21st Century]]


===='''Alexander Dugin'''====

*Intro: [[Is There Really a Noomachian Struggle]]? Michel Bauwens
*Context: [[Discourse of Civilization in the Works of Russia’s New Eurasianists]]
* Videos: 
** [[Michael Millerman on Alexander Dugin's Fourth Political Theory]]
** [[Introduction To Noomachia by Paideuma TV]]
* Book: [[Noomakhia]];  a multi-volume comparison of multiple world cultures


====Julius Evola====

Traditionalist author.

* Book: [[Revolt Against the Modern World]]. Politics, Religion, and Social Order in the Kali Yuga. By Julius Evola. Inner Traditions (Simon & Schuster)


===='''[[Rene Girard]]'''====

*Intro: Rene Girard: Violence and Mimesis: excellent one-volume introduction [https://www.wiley.com/en-us/Rene+Girard%3A+Violence+and+Mimesis-p-9780745629476] ; [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327733518_Rene_Girard_Violence_and_Mimesis full-text]
*Books: 
** [[Violence and the Sacred]]
** [[Things Hidden Since the Foundations of the World]]


===='''Rene Guenon'''====

* Video: [[John David Ebert on Rene Guenon]]
* Book: The [[Crisis of the Modern World]]


===='''Heiner Muhlmann:'''====

*Intro: [[John David Ebert on Heiner Muhlmann's Maximal Stress Cooperation Theory]]
* Books: 
** 1) The [[Nature of Cultures]] ; 
** 2) [[Maximal Stress Cooperation]]


==Thread 10: Civilizational Conflict and Collapse==

TBD: Huntington, Tainter, Coker, etc ..


==Thread 11: Other Important Authors==

* '''Owen Barfield'''
** Intro: [[Evolution of Consciousness as Articulated by Owen Barfield]]
**Book: [[Saving the Appearances]]
* '''Henri Bergson'''
** [[John David Ebert on Henri Bergson's Creative Evolution]]
**Intro: [[Henri Bergson's Creative Evolution]]
**Book: [[Creative Evolution]]
* '''Keith Chandler'''
**Book: [[Beyond Civilization]]: compares four civilizational spheres, and predicts a post-civilizational social order;
* '''[[Herman Dooyeweerd]]'''
**Intro: [[Religious Ground Motives Behind Human Thought]]
**Book: [[Roots of Western Culture]]
**Book: [[In the Twilight of Western Thought]]
* '''Norbert Elias'''
**Book: The [[Civilizing Process]]. Sociogenetic and Psychogenetic Investigations. Revised edition. Oxford: Blackwell, 2000 (Vol.II. [[State Formation and Civilization]], Oxford: Blackwell, 1982)
* '''Edward Gibbon'''
**Intro: [[Edward Gibbon's Theory on the Rise and Fall of Empires]]: "Edward Gibbon famously advanced (the first of his six-volume history of Rome appeared in 1776) a two-part explanation for the decline and fall of the Roman Empire. The Latin West succumbed, he contended, to the spread from within of an increasingly intolerant monotheism, namely Christianity, and it failed, in the end, to repulse the barbarian invasions of the Goths, Vandals, and Huns. The Greco East, on the other hand, was assailed from without by barbarian Arabs and later, from without by the barbarian Turks who had converted to another monotheism, Islam. Thus, both halves of the Roman Empire were destroyed by barbarism and monotheism."
* '''Ivan Illich'''
**Intro: [[Ivan Illich on the Transition Towards an Age of Systems]]
**Bio: David Cayley: 'Ivan Illich: An Intellectual Journey': a magisterial synthesis and interpretation of his late friend and colleague
**Podcast: [[David Cayley on Why Ivan Illich Still Matters]]
* '''Karl Jaspers:'''
** [[John David Ebert on Karl Jaspers's The Origin and Goal of History]]
**Book: The [[Origins and Goal of History]]
**Update: [[From the Axial Age to the Moral Revolution]]: John Stuart-Glennie, Karl Jaspers, and a New Understanding of the Idea by Eugene Halton (2014)
* '''Carl Jung'''
** [[John David Ebert on Carl Jung]]
* '''Marshall McLuhan'''
**Videos: [[John David Ebert on Marshall McLuhan]] ; [[John David Ebert on Marshall McLuhan's Culture Without Literacy]]
**Books: 
***[[Understanding Media]]: The Extensions of Man
***The [[Gutenberg Galaxy]]: understanding the revolution of the printing press
**Co-Authored Books: 
***Marshall and Eric McLuhan. [[Laws of Media]]: The New Science (a rewrite of Understanding Media)
***Marshall and Eric McLuhan. [[Media and Formal Cause]]
***Edmund Carpenter and Marshall McLuhan. The [[New Languages]]
**Articles: [[McLuhan's Phases of Media History]] ; [[Marshall McLuhan's Tetrad of Media Effects]]
**Discussion: [[Integrating Jean Gebser and Marshall McLuhan]]
* '''[[Lewis Mumford]]'''
**Introduction: [[Pioneers of Ecological Humanism]]
**Book: [[Technics and Civilization]]
**Bibliography: "My maturest interpretation of the archaeological and historic evidence will be found in three successive books: The City in History, 1960, Technics and Human Development, 1967, and The Pentagon of Power, 1970." [https://www3.nd.edu/~ehalton/mumfordbio.html]
* '''Camille Paglia'''
** [[John David Ebert on Camille Paglia's Sexual Personae]]
* '''Jordan Peterson'''
** [[John David Ebert on Jordan Peterson's Maps of Meaning]]
* '''Friedrich Schelling:'''
** [[John David Ebert on Schelling's Ages of the World]]
* '''Peter Sloterdijk'''
** [[John David Ebert on Peter Sloterdijk's Spheres]]
** Book: [[Spheres]]
* '''[[Wolfgang Smith]]'''
**Books: 
** [[Cosmos and Transcendence]]; 
** [[Ancient Wisdom and Modern Misconceptions]]: critiques of 'scientistic' beliefs
** [[Vertical Ascent]]: introduction to the 'three-partite Cosmos'
* '''Leo Strauss'''
**Intro: [[Leo Strauss on the Contemporary Crisis in Western Civilization]]
* '''A.N. Whitehead'''
**Book: [[Adventures of Ideas]]
* '''Ken Wilber'''
** Intro: [[John David Ebert on Ken Wilber's Up From Eden]]
** Book: [[Up from Eden]]
** Details: [[Wilber's Research Methodology]]


===Critical Theory Approaches===

*  Adorno, T. W., and Max Horkheimer
** [[Dialectic of Enlightenment]]


===Specific Thematic Approaches Related to World-Systems Analysis===


====Cooperation====

* [[Cooperative Labor for Wheat vs for Rice]]. Tomas Pueyo.


====Ecological World History====

'''The [[Great Simplification]]= "that the long trajectory of human societies that solve problems by adding more energy will reverse this century. ''More energy allows for more complexity, less energy implies a simplification of processes, lifestyles and expectations''".''' (Nate Hagens [https://drive.google.com/file/d/1xo2qQhD5_wszSOfx7BqNul1W0j-FijEg/view])

* Book: Anand Veeraraj. The [[Green History of Religion]].

""Our findings showed that from about 12,000 BCE, the planet went through a warming trend causing extreme climate changes all across the globe. It disrupted primal societies and their ways of life and successively displaced ancient pastoral and agrarian communities. The warming trend intensified rapidly quickening the rise and fall of ancient civilizations at the core centers. The tumultuous social and ecological ethos of the pre-axial times became conducive for the formation of world-denying motifs that became the bedrock of all post-axial religions and philosophies. This, in a nutshell, is the thesis of Green History of Religion."


* Book: '''Ecological Revolution: The [[Political Origins of Environmental Degradation and the Environmental Origins of Axial Religions]]; China, Japan, Europe. by Mark D. Whitaker'''

This crucial book details the '[[Pulsation of the Commons]] in ancient China, medieval Japan, and Post-Roman Europe.


* Book: [[Human Impacts on Ancient Environments]]. By Charles Redman. University of Arizona Press, 1999

* The definite trilogy on the topic, by Sing Chew: [[Ecological Degradation Past and Present]]. A Trilogy. SING C. CHEW. Rowman & Littlefield, 2008 [https://rowman.com/ISBN/9780759112032/Ecological-Degradation-Past-and-Present-A-Trilogy]: "In his trilogy of environmental studies:

#[[World Ecological Degradation]],
#The [[Recurring Dark Ages]], and
#[[Ecological Futures]]

Sing Chew surveys 5,000 years of human history and finds a distinctive, recurring pattern: '''Civilizations that amass vast wealth do so by exhausting their environment'''."


=====Ian Morris' Thermodynamic Histories=====

* Book: The Measure of Civilization: How Social Development Decides the Fate of Nations. By Ian Morris. Princeton University Press, 2013. [https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691155685/the-measure-of-civilization]

"Morris’s index breaks social development into four traits—energy capture per capita, organization, information technology, and war-making capacity—and he uses archaeological, historical, and current government data to quantify patterns. Morris reveals that for 90 percent of the time since the last ice age, the world’s most advanced region has been at the western end of Eurasia, but contrary to what many historians once believed, there were roughly 1,200 years—from about 550 to 1750 CE—when an East Asian region was more advanced. Only in the late eighteenth century CE, when northwest Europeans tapped into the energy trapped in fossil fuels, did the West leap ahead."


* Book: [[Foragers, Farmers and Fossil Fuels]]: [[How Human Values Evolve]]. By Ian Morris. Princeton University Press, 2015
[https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691160399/foragers-farmers-and-fossil-fuels]

"Presents a provocative alternative: human culture gradually evolves towards whatever system of organisation allows a society to harvest the most energy, and we then conclude that system is the most virtuous one. Egalitarian values helped hunter-gatherers hunt and gather effectively. Once farming was developed, hierarchy proved to be the social structure that produced the most grain (and best repelled nomadic raiders). And in the modern era, democracy and individuality have proven to be more productive ways to collect and exploit fossil fuels. On this theory, it’s technology that drives moral values much more than moral philosophy." [https://80000hours.org/podcast/episodes/ian-morris-big-picture-history/]

====Economic World History====

* Book: [[World Civilizations and Economic Cycles]]. Mamikon Airapetian.

* Book: The [[Destiny of Civilization]]. Michael Hudson. [https://michael-hudson.com/2022/05/the-destiny-of-civilization/]: “There are essentially two types of society: mixed economies with public checks and balances, and oligarchies that dismantle and privatize the state, taking over its monetary and credit system, the land and basic infrastructure to enrich themselves but choking the economy, not helping it grow.”

* Book: The [[Measure of Civilization]]: How Social Development Decides the Fate of Nations. By Ian Morris. Princeton University Press, 2013. [https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691155685/the-measure-of-civilization] : " Morris’s index breaks social development into four traits—energy capture per capita, organization, information technology, and war-making capacity — and he uses archaeological, historical, and current government data to quantify patterns."

* Book: Long Cycles: [[Prosperity and War in the Modern Age]]. By Joshua S Goldstein.


====History of the Commons====

* [[Commons, Markets and Associations in the European Middle Ages]]. JEAN-FRANÇOIS DRAPERI. Associations in the Medieval West. From the emergence of the commons to the supremacy of markets. '''Le fait associatif dans l’Occident médiéval. De l’émergence des communs à la suprématie des marchés. Le Bord de l'Eau''', [https://www.editionsbdl.com/produit/le-fait-associatif-dans-loccident-medieval/]: "Associations dominate the economy of the central Middle Ages: monasteries, parishes, guilds, brotherhoods, communes, found the renaissance of the 12th century. Acting on the medieval associative fact invites us to pose the hypothesis that associations and the social economy are not an invention of contemporary society, but rather a discovery. The social economy was not born in reaction to capitalism, but the capitalist economy was born from the transformation of trade associations and the seizure of power by merchants and bankers over the commons and communes in the 13th and 14th centuries."


====History of Gender and Power====

* [[Sex and Power in History]]: How the Difference Between the Sexes Has Shaped Our Destinies. Amaury de Riencourt; traces the changing historic roles of women, especially Western women. He reaches back to remote sources to explain—and suggest solutions to—the current predicament of the sexes. When some three of four thousand years ago men revolted against the myth of the Great Earth Goddess and set up dominant male gods, it was a psychological event of the first magnitude. This shift to the masculine principle, claims de Riencourt, marked the beginning of history proper and led to the male-oriented societies of Greece and Rome."



====History of Media and Interconnective Webs====


====Authors====

* [[Marshall McLuhan]]

=====Articles=====

* [[Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and Cognition]]: from mimetic, to mythic, to theoretic cognitive transmission between humans. See the book: [[Origins of the Modern Mind]]. By Merlin Donald. 1991


=====Books=====

* [[Empire and Communications]]. By Harold Innis. Dundun, 2007 (1950). [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empire_and_Communications]:" ''a sweeping historical survey of how communications media influence the rise and fall of empires'' "


* The Webs of Humankind: A World History. By J. R. McNeill. Norton, 2021. [https://wwnorton.com/books/9780393417418]: see: [[World History of the Webs of Humankind]]

"A cohesive, single-author world history built around the webs of interaction that stitched together regions and over time, the globe. .. McNeill uses connective webs—along which trade, religious beliefs, technologies, pathogens, and much else traveled—to organize details and keep the big picture in view."


* The [[Alphabet vs. the Goddess]]: The Conflict Between Word and Image. by Leonard Shlain: "when a critical mass of people within a society acquire literacy, especially alphabet literacy, left hemispheric modes of thought are reinforced at the expense of right hemispheric ones, which manifests as a decline in the status of images, women's rights, and goddess worship..."


* Eisenstein, Elizabeth L. (1983). The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

* Walter J. Ong. [[Orality and Literacy]]: The Technologizing of the Word. Routledge, 1982.

====Religious History====

* '''[[Cosmos, Chaos, and the World to Come]]. By Professor Norman Cohn. Yale University Press, 2001'''

"Until around 1500 B.C., it was generally believed that once the world had been set in order by the gods, it was in essence immutable. However, it was always a troubled world. By means of flood and drought, famine and plague, defeat in war, and death itself, demonic forces threatened and impaired it. Various combat myths told how a divine warrior kept the forces of chaos at bay and enabled the world to survive. Sometime between 1500 and 1200 B.C., the Iranian prophet Zoroaster broke from that static yet anxious world-view."


* '''The Pursuit of the Millennium: [[Revolutionary Millenarians and Mystical Anarchists of the Middle Ages]]. by Norman Cohn. Oxford University Press, 1970.'''

"This fascinating book explores the millenarianism that flourished in western Europe between the eleventh and sixteenth centuries. Covering the full range of revolutionary and anarchic sects and movements in medieval Europe, Cohn demonstrates how prophecies of a final struggle between the hosts of Christ and Antichrist melded with the rootless poor's desire to improve their own material conditions, resulting in a flourishing of millenarian fantasies. The only overall study of medieval millenarian movements, The Pursuit of the Millennium offers an excellent interpretation of how, again and again, in situations of anxiety and unrest, traditional beliefs come to serve as vehicles for social aspirations and animosities."


====War====

* [[War in Human Civilization]]. Azar Gat.

* [[Civilization and War]]. Brett Bowden. Edward Elgar, 2013, 224 pp [https://www.e-elgar.com/shop/gbp/civilization-and-war-9781782545712.html]

===Specific Books on the Theme of the Evolution of Consciousness Through Time===

List of readings inspired by John David Ebert. Ebert has organized these recommended readings in 2 pairs: Steiner and Aurobindo focus directly on the spiritual aspects; Neumann and Gebser on the psychological; and de Chardin and Arthur Young, on the physical/scientific plane.


===='''Intro:'''====

* The [[Evolution of Consciousness as a Planetary Imperative]]: An Integration of Integral Views. By Jennifer Gidley. INTEGRAL REVIEW 5, 2007
[https://www.academia.edu/197841/The_Evolution_of_Consciousness_as_a_Planetary_Imperative_An_Integration_of_Integral_Views]: ; strongly recommended book-length attempt at comparison of the evolutionary narratives of Rudolf Steiner, Jean Gebser, and Ken Wilber.


'''The authors:'''

(they are treated more fully in other sections of the bibliography; this is a short specialized list)

====[[Rudolf Steiner]]====

* Book: An Outline of Esoteric Science.
* Video: [https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL-UEWTEQOYufkqKLgfwkSSDsnP8nT12Nk John David Ebert on Rudolf Steiner's Outline of Esoteric Science]: playlist
* Outline: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NqCksr5w7AU part 1] ; [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OmYHHq25PMI part 2] ; [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UL9gkHFb5UA Creation myth: Moon]


====[[Sri Aurobindo]]====

* Introductory Book: Satprem on [[Sri Aurobindo or the Adventure of Consciousness]]
* Book: The [[Life Divine]]
* Video: [[John David Ebert on Sri Aurobindo's The Life Divine]]


====[[Eric Neumann]]====

* Book: The [[Origins and History of Consciousness]]
* Details: [[Steiner’s Research Methodology]]


====[[Jean Gebser]]====

* Intro: The [[Evolution of Consciousness According to Jean Gebser]]
* Video: [[John David Ebert on Jean Gebser's Ever-Present Origin]]
* Book: The [[Ever-Present Origin]]
* Details: [[Gebser’s Research Methodology]]


====[[Pierre Teilhard de Chardin]]====

* Book: The [[Phenomenon of Man]]


====[[Arthur Young]]====

* Video: [[John David Ebert on Arthur Young's The Reflexive Universe]] 
* Book: The [[Reflexive Universe]]

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]