'''* Article / Chapter: Broumas, A. 2020. Chapter 3: Theories of the Intellectual Commons. In: Intellectual Commons and the Law: A Normative Theory for Commons-Based Peer Production. Pp. 27–62. London: University of Westminster Press.''' DOI: https://doi.org/10.16997/book49.c.  

URL = https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctv1g4rtsw.8


=Summary=

"Over the past twenty years, theorising about the intellectual commons has
undeniably become a popular activity, not only among scholars who deal with
the dialectics between information/communication technologies and society
but also among the wider scientific community. This chapter introduces the
main theoretical trends that have been formulated in relation to the analysis of
the intellectual commons and their relation with capital.

In this context, '''four families of theories are distinguished''' on the grounds
of their epistemological foundations, their analytical tools with regard to
social actors, social structures and the dynamics between them, their normative criteria and, finally, their perspectives on social change. 

'''Rational choice theories''' draw from the work of Elinor Ostrom and deal with the institutional
characteristics of the intellectual commons, offering a perspective of complementarity between commons and capital. 

Furthermore, '''neoliberal theories''' elaborate on the profit-maximising opportunities of the intellectual commons
and further highlight their capacities of acting as a fix to capital circulation/
accumulation in intellectual property-enabled commodity markets. 

In addition, '''social democratic theories''' propose the forging of a partnership between a
transformed state and the communities of the commons and put forward specific transition plans for a commons-oriented society. 

Last but not least, '''critical theories''' conceptualise the productive patterns encountered within intellectual
commons as a proto-mode of production in germinal form, which is a direct
expression of the advanced productive forces of the social intellect and has
the potential to open alternatives to capital. In conclusion, the four theoretical
frameworks are compared, with the aim of formulating a strong theory of the
intellectual commons."

(https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctv1g4rtsw.8)

[[Category:IP]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons]]