
=Interview=

The theologian of Creation Spirituality, Matthew Fox, makes an argument for a culture of biophilia coupled to a 'theology of the flesh', in this interview undertaken by Lauren de Boer in 2001:

'''Matthew Fox:'''

"There's a line from Eric Fromm: "necrophilia increases when biophilia is stunted." That line really names our culture, which is very involved with necrophilia in many levels and subtle ways. How do we bring biophilia back, how do we pump it up? How do we help people cut through cynicism and despair? Thich Naht Hahn talks about the seeds of peace that have to be watered or the seeds of violence will take over. The culture has not just seeds, but orchards of violence in place.

'''Lauren: When I think about what happened at Littleton, the kids who survived it, the people in that community, I wonder what a Council of Elders might do to give the kids and the community a sense of reconnection with the cosmos, with meaning within the larger story. To do it openly as a nation, to grieve openly, would be a very healing thing to have happen. You've written in many places about the violence that comes out of not having a functional cosmology.'''

* Matt: When you don't have a cosmology, and your heart breaks, you have no place to take it. Violence often results. Even the preoccupation with horror is because it's the only "big thing" kids are exposed to. Their big feelings of fear get fed, because there is no positive cosmology being taught. There's no sense of wonder or awe. Fear is the shadow side of awe. At least it's big. But it's not enough to get you through life in any positive sense.

'''Lauren: In Sins of the Spirit, Blessings of the Flesh, you write: "the ecological crisis is a flesh crisis." Would you say more about what you mean by that?'''


* Matt: The new cosmology allows us to see flesh in perspective, in context. We realize now that we can de-anthropocentrize our understanding of flesh, that flesh is all matter, all the elements that make up matter. And that, to our surprise, those beings like ourselves who have flesh, are really quite rare. It's a special opportunity-and responsibility. The new creation story is really teaching us that all material beings have flesh. And we're all related.

What this does is to detox the Western attitude toward the word flesh. The Greeks messed up. Paul, as the very first writer in the Christian bible, went along with the Greek mess-up, even though Jesus was not that way. The Jewish tradition itself is not suspect of flesh. Augustine in the 4th century made it even more of a problem. That has really stuck in the memory of the western church. Fear of flesh has taken over western theology. All of that is an insult to the tradition of the incarnation, which is a celebration of divinity taking on flesh in its many forms.

Why is the ecological crisis a flesh crisis? Because it's about our relationship with the other dynamics of flesh. The ecosystem of the forests, ozone, birds, animals, soil, water-all this is flesh too.

Given a different creation story, we can say, "we're in this together, and what happens to the soil will effect, literally, the food I eat. And the food my children eat." That is a survival question, a flesh question, a spiritual question.


...

Flesh is something we encounter daily. If we encounter it with a negative attitude, which is what much of our western religious traditions laid on us, then we're going to miss the point. We're not going to have the energy to deal with it when flesh is threatened. I also connect this in the book to the first chakra, to the lower chakras in general. The church has done a terrible job in misleading us about the lower chakras. So, for example, pride is a sin. Pride isn't a sin. The lack of pride is a sin. Pride is necessary-that's what self-esteem means. Arrogance is a sin. Under arrogance come anthropocentrism, racism, sexism, homophobia. All that's arrogant. That's a sin. But not pride. We've been misled there. The nature of lust-I don't think lust is a sin, it's a gift. If you love life, we should be thanking our parents and nature daily for lust. That's what brought us here. But obviously sexuality is a power that can be misused and become a power trip. That's when our sexuality becomes suspect.

Thirdly, anger. We've been told by St. Augustine that anger is a capital sin. But I don't think it is. I think violence is. Anger itself is a healthy response.


'''Lauren: We've explored this notion for some time in EarthLight that the environmental crisis is a crisis of the spirit. When you say that ecological crisis is a crisis of the flesh, I'm thinking, it's really the same thing.'''

* Matt: And that crisis can raise our consciousness about our attitude toward spirit and flesh. Another connection I make in the book about the first chakra is that acedia-the "lack of energy to begin new things," in Aquinas's words, a cynicism, couch potato-itis-is fed by a lack of cosmology. And it's healed by an intense experience of the beauty of things. Beauty is primary to loving life, to staying in there.

If you think of most of the two million years that our species has been here, you were looking at stars every night, you were watching the seasons roll around, you were so much closer to nature. I don't think we've begun to really grasp how much an urban culture has robbed us of this.

The price we paid for the modern era has been to diminish the sense of mystery and the presence of beauty that's among us. With that, we're set up for consumerism, passivity, and couch potato-itis."

(https://earthlight.org/essay42_fox.html)

[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Ecology]]