'''* Essay: The Theory of Permanent Counterrevolution. By Kees van der Pijl, 2005'''

URL = https://www.academia.edu/13702210/The_Theory_of_Permanent_Counterrevolution


=Abstract=
 
"After the repression following the bourgeois revolts of 1848 in Europe Marx and En'=gels adjusted their original ideas of working class class revolution with the theory of permanent revolution -it held that since the bourgeoisie no longer could be counted on to side with the  workers against the ruling classes, socialists should move from the stage of democratic revolution straight to that of socialist transformation. The international dimension of this theory &as emphasised by Trotsky when he reformulated the theory in the early stages of the Russian revolution but one can also turn the argument around by seeing that beginning with the repression of the 1850s, a process of permanent counterrevolution has evolved which has passed through phases of retrenchment and attack, without allowing the initiative to pass to the side of revolution ever again. From this Perspective, fascism and Fordism, the successive editions of the Cold War, covert action, military interventions and full-scale wars are all part of this counterrevolutionary process.  It owes its permanency to its unrelenting imposition  which in each case works to isolate revolutionary challenges with the concentrated strength of the international forces and yet today, against the background of a deepening crisis of exhaustion of capitalist discipline, has reached its apogee without having obliterated the forces of resistance worldwide. This paper presents a first outline of the argument of a forthcoming book, The End of Political Compromise in Capitalism."


=Phases=

==Three Phases of Permanent Counterrevolution ==

Kees van der Pijl:

"The epoch of permanent counterrevolution that opened up in the mid-19th 
century, with 1848 the most significant single date, passed through three phases. 
 One was the contender state phase, in which the counterrevolutionary 
response to challenges was combined the diversionary use of violence 
(repression and/or war) with the accelerated mobilisation of the 
productive forces to catch up with the liberal West. Fascism was the high 
point of this phase and it ended in 1945 with the defeat of the Axis 
Powers. 

 The second was the American Century phase, in which the Atlantic 
ruling class contained state socialism, but the latter, locked in the 
confrontation as a contender bloc, also worked to stultify further 
democratic development. The West now was forced to calibrate the use 
of extreme violence and intervened selectively to support local ruling 
classes, from Greece in 1947 and 1967 and Turkey (several times) to 
Indonesia, Chile and Argentina, not forgetting the wars in Korea and 
Vietnam; whilst the Soviet bloc maintained discipline on its side 
(Hungary, Czechoslovakia). This phase ended in 1991 with the collapse of 
the USSR. 

 The third phase is the contemporary systemic crisis phase in which we 
witness an across-the-board drift towards authoritarianism and 
proliferating violence in the framework of the ‘War on Terror’ 
accompanying the exhaustion of the social and natural substratum of 
globalising capital and state capitalism alike."


=Excerpt=

From the conclusion:

"In the aftermath of the 1848 revolts, the bourgeoisie lost its appetite for general 
popular revolts and began to withdraw from alliances with the population at large 
and especially with the working class, embarking instead on what I call a process 
of permanent counterrevolution. It combined the propagation of economic 
liberalism and the suppression of its corollary, political liberalism, where it 
threatened to spill over into socialism. This counterrevolution, occasionally in 
response to real revolutions (the Paris Commune, the Russian, Chinese, 
Vietnamese, Korean, and Cuban revolutions), but more often in anticipation of 
them, has deployed a range of different forms, combining into a permanent 
process fascism and Fordism, the successive editions of the Cold War, covert 
action and parafascism, military interventions and full-scale wars as well as 
colour revolutions. In the process of suppressing radical currents at home and 
abroad, Atlantic liberalism provided a series of inbuilt emergency provisions to 
ensure that the property-owning classes would be insulated from popular 
demands, economic from (excessive) political liberalism. These were put into 
practice in three phases, each in different zones of the global political economy. 
In the first phase, from the 1850s to 1945, Britain was ‘the rock on which the 
counterrevolution will build its church’ (Marx), but concrete emergencies arose 
primarily in the ‘semi-peripheral’ contender states: France, followed by Germany, 
Italy and Japan, and a host of secondary contenders in southern and eastern 
Europe, Turkey and Iran, and Latin America. They were responded to by 
authoritarian clampdowns which culminated in the totalitarian fascisms that 
went down in the Second World War, when a viable liberal capitalist alternative 
still was available in the form of US Fordism. 

Secondly, in the American Century phase, the United States inherited Britain’s 
hegemonic role in the Lockean heartland, both as the engine of globalising capital 
and the ‘rock on which the counterrevolution will build its church’. However, with 
a Soviet bloc facing it as the new contender and a Third World emerging from the 
process of decolonisation seeking its way between east and west, the US 
calibrated its counterrevolutionary interventions by deploying a parafascist 
apparatus for repression and war-making, besides building the largest military 
machine in human history. This complex has long escaped democratic control 
and today is wreaking havoc the world around. 

Nevertheless, especially since 1991, capitalism and hence the ability to sustain 
the counterrevolution are beginning to lose ground, in what I call the systemic 
crisis phase. We have definitely entered a new epoch—one of daunting challenges 
in terms of social dislocation including unprecedented levels of organised crime, 
as well as ecological destruction on a scale ranking with the great extinctions of 
the past. The ‘optimism of the will’ itself has become endangered in the face of 
many trends and events fueling the ‘pessimism of the intellect’, but somehow it 
cannot be extinguished."

(https://www.academia.edu/13702210/The_Theory_of_Permanent_Counterrevolution?email_work_card=title)

[[Category:Change_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Class_Theory]]
[[Category:P2P_Theory]]
[[Category:Politics]]