
'''* Book: Theories of International Regimes. Editor(s): Hasenclever, Andreas, Mayer, Peter, Rittberger, Volker. Cambridge University Press, 1997'''


=Abstract=

The three schools of thought regarding international cooperation [regimes] – interest-based theories, power-based theories, and knowledge-based theories – provide numerous insights from which it is possible to draw some general findings about cooperation. 

'''Findings:'''

* Possibilities for cooperation are often enhanced by the presence of someone who takes an active leadership role. Structural leaders v. intellectual leaders v. charismatic leaders, etc. 
* The likelihood of cooperative outcomes for the four problem-structural scenarios: “conflict over values” : very low, “conflict over means” : medium, “conflict over relative gains” : low, “conflict over absolute gains” : high. 
* Institutions matter, but for different reasons. 
* Cooperation on easier issues can ease cooperation in more difficult issues. 
* Costs of monitoring and insuring compliance are lower when arrangements are self-enforcing. 
* Conflict over means when goals are agreed upon is easier to solve than conflict over the goals themselves. Cooperatively reaching an agreed upon solution is easier than agreeing on the solution in the first place. 
* Cooperation is easier in situations where relative gains are less of a concern. 
* Uncertainty over the impacts of not cooperating, as well as exogenous shocks, both increase the likelihood of cooperation. 
* Powerful players (hegemons) can promote cooperation by bearing costs. 
* Knowledge and beliefs that affect players calculations of costs and benefits can increase the likelihood of cooperation. 
* Group norms that shape the definition of “rational” behavior also influence cooperation. 
* Institutions assist cooperation by embedding and sharing knowledge and norms."
(http://cooperationcommons.com/node/414)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Governance]]