'''*  Book: Havoc, Thy Name is Twenty-First Century! Thermodynamic Isolation and the New World Order. By Peter Pogany.'''

URL = https://integralpermaculture.wordpress.com/peter-pogany/? [https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/49924/1/MPRA_paper_49924.pdf essay version]

=Description=

Integral Permaculture:

"The book “ was published posthumously in 2015.  This work is a slight alteration and expansion of a paper published in 2013.
 
Here is the blurb for this book:

“Just to maintain our standard of living, we need to grow the worldwide economy at an unsustainable rate.
As we seek to hit such lofty targets, we’re bound to deplete our resources and cause environmental crises on a scale that we have never seen before. Revolutions, terrorism, and wars will follow.

Peter Pogany examines the problems we face and argues that human culture is governed by thermodynamic cycles of steady states interrupted by chaotic transitions. Specifically, he postulates that a steady state was interrupted by World War I, with a chaotic transition following World War II, which has led us to the current world order.

His theory predicts that global society is drifting toward a new form of self-organization that will recognize limits to demographic-economic expansion – but only after we go through a new chaotic transition that will start sometime between now and the 2030s.

Havoc, They Name is Twenty-First Century, delivers sobering thoughts on where the world is headed, but it also offers a glimpse of a bright future that we can embrace once we get through the darkness to come.”
(https://integralpermaculture.wordpress.com/peter-pogany/?)

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]