=Discussion=

[[Peter Pogany]]:

'''1.'''

"Let me start by briefly recapping the thermodynamic take on universal
history.

In Gebser’s spirit of searching for transparency through the integral, my
project -- “new historical materialism” -- 

 '''uses “Global Population Plus Economy” as the central variable. GLOPPE (for short)''' 

is both a material
entity and a flux or throughput of matter, which by the second law of
thermodynamics increases the proportion of inaccessible energy in the
terrestrial sphere. As all other self-organizing entities that complexify as
they grow in size, GLOPPE must also go through alternating phases of
relative steady states and chaotic transitions. World history is the human
face of this thermodynamic phenomenon. Concentrating on the age of global
systems (modernity in terms of macrohistory, the era since the breakthrough
of time at Gebser) this necessary alteration may be summarized as follows:

- Chaotic transition from 1789 to the mid-1830s led to the world’s first global
system -- GS1, laissez-faire/zero multilateralism/metal money. 

- Chaotic transition from 1914 to 1945 ushered in the second and current
global order -- GS2, mixed economy/weak multilateralism/minimum reserve
banking.


The world now faces a new episode of chaotic transition because GLOPPE
has reached stochastically manifest but nonetheless insuperable resource and
environmental constraints and GS2 is unable to guide transition to ecological
sustainability because the required resource reallocation would curtail
economic growth. Yet this system will collapse unless it can accelerate.
The crisis of GS2 is the crisis of mental consciousness.

Thus, we arrive at the intersection of the thermodynamic theory of history
and Gebser. The structuration of consciousness as a unidirectional unfolding
corresponds to the morphogenesis of socioeconomic self-organization. Each
represents a way of looking at totality as a historical process. Magic
consciousness is discernible as nomadic hunting and gathering; mythical
consciousness corresponds to the predominance of agriculture, and the
active presence of mental consciousness during the past two-and-a-half
millennia encompasses the birth, slow development, and breathtaking push
of industry in the age of global systems.

Whereas the chaotic transformation of GS1 into GS2 (which may be
considered a submutation within mental consciousness) enabled GLOPPE to
continue its expansion, the new chaotic transition to a yet-to-be determined
form of global organization will have to emerge because, for the first time in
history, planet-wide resource and environmental constraints are beginning to
limit the size of global society and the scale of its activities.
This view of the world differs sharply from practically everything that
mainstream economics has to say about current events, the third avenue at
our intersection. Traditional analysis attributes the Great Recession to the
financial crisis of 2008, while economists with heterodox, ecologically
informed opinions maintain that the mortgage market collapsed, triggering
the financial fiasco because expensive gasoline hiked commuting costs to
exurbia. Mainstream analysis has bifurcated into considering further
increases in the U.S. national debt extremely dangerous, threatening default;
and considering it harmless as long as further deficit spending is job-creating
via New Deal style public projects. According to the heterodox opinion, one
of the manifestations of GS2’s crisis is that the national debt should neither
be allowed to increase, nor could it be reduced without creating havoc.
Gradual transformation to ecological sustainability through existing
institutions is patent of cornucopia-obsessed economic orthodoxy. The
heterodox view is that such an outcome is an Aladdin’s lamp caliber
fairytale from kindergarten.

But nowhere is the rampage of “ratio” more apparent than in GS2’s
financial-monetary order. The acuteness of the situation in this domain
brings Gebser’s prophetic warning to mind. He characterized the end result
of escalating deficiency in mental consciousness as “the suicide of Western
civilization.”


'''2.'''

"To round up the argument, the wide scale, generalized mutation into the
integral structure will not be the result of self-development, an individually
willed inward journey to our quintessential core, the “itself.” Rather, it will
be compelled along with the emergence of a third global system (GS3) that
will take into account humanity’s thermodynamic reality -- the limits to
GLOPPE’s growth. GS3’s main attributes could be two-level
economy/strong multilateralism/maximum bank reserve money. At one level,
production in specific sectors; e.g., mining, the manufacture of structural
materials and certain heavily polluting industries, will have to be controlled
and divvied up among nations or multinational producers; and some
activities, such as space exploration, will have to be financed and organized
jointly. At the second level, private enterprise and free markets would
flourish under thoughtfully conceived quantitative constraints.

GS3’s multilateralism would represent the democratically valid consent of
the world’s population to a moral and legal authority to overrule local
preferences in favor of long-term global interests. Frightening as this
prospect may sound, as it evokes the specter of “world government,” Gebser
serves here as a source of optimistic reassurance. Since GS3 and integral
consciousness are identical, the world is bound to discover that only the
return of archaic pre-temporality, enriched with the unfolded powers of
consciousness can assure both a more fulfilling, anxiety-free individual life
and the world’s survival under dignified conditions, materially and socially.
As far as the monetary subsystem is concerned, it would reflect the need to
control both the scale and structure of economic activities."

(http://storage.ning.com/topology/rest/1.0/file/get/2633102476?profile=original)

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P_History]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic_Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Articles]]