
'''* Bookchapter: Thinking about Commons: A post-capitalist perspective for social work. By Jef Peeters. In: A-L. Matthies & K. Närhi (eds.), The Ecosocial Transition of Societies: The contribution of social work and social policy (p. 71-88). Abingdon: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-4724-7349-3'''

URL = https://www.routledge.com/The-Ecosocial-Transition-of-Societies-The-contribution-of-social-work/Matthies-Narhi/p/book/9781472473493

=Description=

Jef Peeters:

"Looking for a new economic paradigm, above all the growing new commons movement
comes to the fore. Commons - common goods managed by communities - define a logic
beyond market and state, thus prominently represent an alternative for the factual market-state
duopoly. Moreover, this logic encompass in its core principles of sharing and cooperation
well suited to realize the needed prosperity without growth. Further it is able to form a bridge
between various alternative economic movements (Bollier and Conaty 2015). To place the
commons within a broad horizon of transformational social change, I first look at some
fundamental understanding of economics from anthropological and historical studies. This
leads to a critical understanding of the actual market society and of the challenge of a
paradigmatic shift. Next I will focus on the commons: defining them and explaining their
relation to peer production and to the sharing economy. Then I present a proposal for a
commons based transition to a post-capitalist society, which in the last part will be translated
to some first ideas for social work and social policy."

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:Post-Capitalism]]