

Recorded video available via http://creativecommons.org.tw/gallery/Conf07/cctw-conf07-part-02.ogm


=Description=

"Scientific research is transformed by the network, just like culture. Scholarly knowledge of all forms, disciplines, and languages is becoming increasingly digitized. Open access publications are growing in influence and importance and increasing their impact on the scholarly corpus. Likewise data is undergoing a transformation from physical archives to databases and digital data repositories. This digitalization of science has paradoxical effects. While it can make vast bodies of knowledge instantly available almost anywhere, it can also be used to increase control over who has access. In recent years, journal costs have grown dramatically, far outpacing inflation. The explosion of journals and publications means that the gap between those with access and those without is widening, and access is a concern not only for "marginal" audiences, but increasingly also for researchers at well-funded institutions. The growth of open access publishing has been an important countervailing force, and the Creative Commons licenses have played a significant role in enabling and supporting these developments. However, open access publishing is only part of the picture. Science requires access to more than just text, but also to data and materials. Science Commons is working on projects in open access to publications, data, and materials, by creating prototypes of policy, technology, and legal infrastructure that touch upon all stages of the research cycle. The presentation will discuss changing trends in scientific research, the effects of changing technological and policy environments, and the efforts of Science Commons to translate the lessons of "open and free" into effective tools and policies for the global scientific community."
(http://creativecommons.org.tw/static/conference2007/sessions/abstract/english)


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Science]]