URL = http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thinglink

=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"A thinglink is a freely obtainable globally unique object identifier. One could say that it is the 'open source' version of a DOI.

The idea of the thinglink was conceived in 2005 by Ulla-Maaria Mutanen after a discussion with Jimmy Wales at reboot7 in Copenhagen. The entity a thinglink refers to can be both physical as well as virtual, and can be a unique item or a class of similar items."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thinglink)


=Thinglink Catalog=


URL = http://www.thinglinkblog.com/

"Designers and brands who upload their catalogs to thinglink.com can build a community of fans around their products. Design enthusiasts who join the conversation on thinglink.com can post messages about their latest discoveries, ask and answer questions about new and vintage products, and share photos of their favorite design objects in real life settings.

The Thinglink catalog includes products from classic and contemporary designers and manufacturers. It contains many kinds of products, ranging from serially produced ones to limited edition items and unique one-of-a-kind objects.

Users can register the products they own and create unique identifiers for their privately owned items. Each product can become the center of a conversation and be photographed and discussed by its fans and owners."
(http://www.thinglinkblog.com/2009/04/15/new-private-beta/)




=More Information=

#[http://ullamaaria.typepad.com/hobbyprincess/2005/11/what_is_a_thing.html What is a thinglink?]


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Standards]]