
'''= a collaborative solution between small business owners and communities of DIY enthusiasts.'''

=Description=

Julia Levitt:

"If an expert artisan wants to open a shop that's fully equipped to let them do their thing – carpentry, bike maintenance, sewing, etc. – it can be an expensive up-front investment. But by pairing their excess (in this case, the evening or weekend time that their studio sits idle) with a community need (hobbyists who would love limited access to equipment and resources), they can reach an elegant solution."
(http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/009769.html)


=Status=

Julia Levitt:

"Several versions of Third Place Studios are already thriving. In 2005 Wendy Tremayne, an artist, teacher, event producer and all-around innovator launched Swap-O-Rama-Rama, a model for clothing swap-and-alter extravaganzas that continues to be replicated in cities all around the U.S. and internationally. Another model is being used by organizations like Chicago's non-profit West Town Bikes. Though it's currently in a quiet phase due to its upcoming move, West Town hosts bi-weekly "Open Shop" events where cyclists can show up and pay a small fee for access to space, equipment and an experienced maintenance staff as they work on their own bikes. The Print Studio in Hamilton, Ontario is a non-profit arts organization that rents studio and equipment access to working artists on an hourly, daily, weekly or monthly basis. And entrepreneurial types have launched other third place studios as a for-profit business model. The Prep Kitchen, for example, provides ready-to-go ingredients (pre-chopped, soaked and boiled) for homemade dinners. Busy people can come and enjoy the process of assembling and customizing each dish – all of which can be eaten that day or frozen for later – in a fully equipped, clean kitchen facility."
(http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/009769.html)


=More Information=

* [http://81.246.16.10/videos/publications/collaborative_services.pdf Collaborative Services]: [[Social Innovation and Design For Sustainability]] (PDF), a 200-page study on product service systems and similar concepts produced by sustainable design visionaries François Jégou and Ezio Manzini. The report contains a wealth of great ideas for creating new shared services and making existing models more appealing and effective. [http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/009769.html]



[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]