
'''= a leadership approach that elicits engagement, commitment, and enhanced personal, group, and organisational accountability.'''

=Description=

"There have been two critical leadership approaches. First Generation Leadership (command and control) was the dominant model until the 1940s. Second Generation Leadership (compliance coupled with rewards and punishments) is still dominant today. This approach is being rejected by 'Generation Y', threatening the longevity of traditional organisations. In "Third Generation Leadership and the Locus of Control", Douglas Long acknowledges the need for a leadership approach that elicits engagement, commitment, and enhanced personal, group, and organisational accountability. This is Third Generation Leadership. At its core lies the issue of where we centre our brain's locus of control and how this impacts on our understanding of and approach to leadership. With examples from everyday situations, underpinned by research, this book is about understanding and applying aspects of neuroscience critical for tomorrow's world. It provides a framework for addressing problems through insights into how the way we use our brains affects values, worldviews and behaviours. The author introduces the concept of 'red zone - blue zone' to explain the differences between a brain controlled by its stem-limbic areas (red zone) and the limbic-cortical cortex areas (blue zone).
 
This becomes a short hand for describing and applying knowledge from neuroscience to encourage practitioners in leadership and management roles to achieve desired outcomes through becoming acquainted with different areas of their brain. Anyone grappling with what is required to deal with Generation Y people in a networked and mobile age will welcome this introduction to the world of third generation leadership."
([http://www.amazon.com/Third-Generation-Leadership-Locus-Control/dp/1409444538/])


==Source=

* Book: Third Generation Leadership and the Locus of Control: Knowledge, Change and Neuroscience. Douglas G. Long. Gower, 2012


[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]