'''= leading advocate of monetary transformation and the [[Credit Commons]]'''

URL = http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Greco
 

=Bio=


'''Thomas H. Greco, Jr.'' is a writer, consultant, and networker who has, for more than three decades, been working at the leading edge of transformational restructuring, and is regarded as one of the leading experts in monetary theory and history, credit clearing systems, complementary currencies, and community economic development. 

He has traveled widely in Europe, Asia, and the Americas, lecturing, teaching, and networking. He has been a keynote speaker at numerous conferences including the 2009 and 2006 annual conventions of the International Reciprocal Trade Association (IRTA, the trade association for the commercial “barter” industry), the Economics of Peace Conference in California in 2009, the Gold Dinar Conference in Malaysia in 2007, and the conference on Knowledge, Business and Consciousness held at the international community of Auroville, India in 2006, and many others.

He is the author of numerous books and articles. His most recent book, '''The End of Money and the Future of Civilization''' (Chelsea Green, 2009), is both descriptive of the essence of money and its historical evolution, and prescriptive of actions that can be taken by communities, businesses, and governments to enhance economic stability through liberation of the exchange process. 

His previous books on complementary currencies and exchange systems are '''Money: Understanding and Creating Alternatives to Legal Tender''' (Chelsea Green, 2001) and '''New Money for Healthy Communities''' (1994), which describe voluntary alternatives to conventional money that empower communities and reward people fairly. His first book, Money and Debt: A Solution to the Global Crisis (1990) explains how conventional money malfunctions and how an ideal money would be structured, and proposes a plan for solving the global debt crisis and making the transition to an interest-free, harmonious economic and financial world order. 

He has written for a wide range of journals including, Alternet, The Whole Earth Review, World Business Academy Perspectives, At Work, Earth Island Journal, The Catholic Worker, The Permaculture Activist, Permaculture Drylands Journal, Green Revolution, Fourth World Review, and other publications.

A former college professor, he is currently Director of the non-profit '''Community Information Resource Center''', a networking hub that provides information access and administrative support for efforts in community resilience, social justice, and sustainability. He and maintains an active correspondence and major web presence through his websites (http://reinventingmoney.com/) and blogs (http://beyondmoney.net/). 

Mr. Greco holds an MBA (Business Administration) from the University of Rochester and a Bachelor’s degree in Chemical Engineering from Villanova University. He spent a year in residence doing doctoral study in Management, and Instructional Technology at Syracuse University. His work experience includes 5 years as an aerospace engineer and 14 years in academia where he held a tenured faculty position. His expertise includes monetary theory, complementary currency and exchange systems, computer applications, statistics and survey research."

=Publications=

* Books: 
** The [[End of Money and the Future of Civilization]] (ChelseaGreen, 2009)       
** Money: Understanding and Creating Alternatives to Legal Tender (Chelsea Green, 2001)
** New Money for Healthy Communities (1994)
** Money and Debt: a Solution to the Global Crisis (1990)

=More Information=

#Website: http://reinventingmoney.com
#Blog-Beyond Money: http://beyondmoney.net
#Blog-Tom's News and Views: http://tomazgreco.wordpress.com
#Another bio at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Greco
 


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Money]]