* Article: [[Stefan Tuschen]]: Two Concepts, one aim? Thoughts on development politics and commons


=Text=

"What links development policy and commons? Dealing with both debates,
one can identify quite some common ground. Many questions that are taken
up within the commons debate are of great relevance in developing
countries. Does the concept of commons offer perspectives for the
political work on development?

Commons do not exist by themselves. They have to evolve, been taken care
of and developed further. It is the community using a resource in common
that turns this resource into a common in the first place. Commons are
not just a concept for the Global South. And when it comes to politics,
commons are not just of interest for the development sector. Even though
or precisely because of the fact that commons can not offer a
one-size-fits-all solution to all problems: today commons, when
understood as an anti-thesis to the neoliberal globalization mainstream,
provide a perspective beyond the state and the market. And what also
marks up the commons debate is that a global approach explicitly backs
locally adapted, problem specific solutions. Hence it is not about
following prefabricated patterns.

The commons approach does provide perspectives for development policy.
Two aspects have to be highlighted: First, the concept of commons
opposes the neoliberal economization of each and every aspect of life.
Instead it points to alternative ways of problem solving. The commons
concept is an interesting connecting factor for a development policy
which – according to its self-image – stands at the side of the poor and
marginalized, who are no well funded demanders.

Second, the commons approach turns the people's competence to solve
problems against all patterns of catching-up as well as of sustainable
development. Regardless of the need for global governance structures in
favour of development, it is all about maintaining and creating (policy)
space for communities enabling them to pursue their respective
interests. This applies for the locally organized use of a forest as
well as for the globally cross-linked use of an operating computer system."


=In German=

See: Michael Frein und Stefan Tuschen. Zwei Konzepte, ein Ziel?. [[Überlegungen zu Entwicklungspolitik und Commons]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Politics]]