
'''* Article: Pilkington, O.A. (2021). Citizen Scholars and Digital Humanities. Academia Letters, Article 2063'''. [https://doi.org/10.20935/AL2063]

URL = https://www.academia.edu/50135095/Citizen_Scholars_and_Digital_Humanities?email_work_card=view-paper


=Summary=

Olga A. Pilkington:

"In the face of recent changes in academia such as the increasing prominence of OA publishing as a sign of overall shift toward transparency, it is important to examine and re-evaluate avenues of involvement in scholarly endeavors by those who are part of the academy and by the communities in which academic institutions are embedded. Citizen scholarship needs to be recognized and formalized as a viable category of research in humanities as developments in digital humanities have led to increased contributions from non-professionals. Technological innovations in sciences have contributed, historically, to denial of access to both knowledge production and consumption for non-professionals. In humanities, however, the advent of technology has had a democratizing eect on epistemic availability. 

'''The spheres of human knowledge have gone through three stages of development''', so far. 

* The first can be called The Development and Recognition of a particular line of inquiry as a discipline. 
* The second is the inevitable Professionalization — a point at which access to the established discipline becomes restricted based on education (and, unfortunately, gender).
* The third stage represents Popularization — a turn back to acceptance of contributions from people not associated with the discipline professionally."

[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Science]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]