

=Description=

Proposed by David Eaves:

"The Three Laws of [[Open Government Data]]:

#If it can’t be spidered or indexed, it doesn’t exist 
#If it isn’t available in open and machine readable format, it can’t engage 
#If a legal framework doesn’t allow it to be repurposed, it doesn’t empower"
(http://eaves.ca/2009/09/30/three-law-of-open-government-data/)



=Discussion=

"To explain, (1) basically means: Can I find it? If Google (and/or other search engines) can't find it, it essentially doesn't exist for most citizens. So you'd better ensure that you are optimized to be crawled by all sorts of search engine spiders.

After I've found it, (2) notes that, to be useful, I need to be able to play with the data. Consequently, I need to be able to pull or download it in a useful format (e.g. an API, subscription feed, or a documented file). Citizens need data in a form that lets them mash it up with Google Maps or other data sets, or analyze in Excel. This is essentially the difference between VanMaps (look, but don't play) and the Vancouver Data Portal, (look, take and play!). Citizens who can't play with information are citizens who are disengaged/marginalized from the discussion.

Finally, even if I can find it and play with it, (3) highlights that I need a legal framework that allows me to share what I've created, to mobilize other citizens, provide a new service or just point out an interesting fact. This is the difference between Canada's House of Parliament's information (which, due to crown copyright, you can take, play with, but don't you dare share or re-publish) and say, Whitehouse.gov which "pursuant to federal law, government-produced materials appearing on this site are not copyright protected."

Find, Play and Share. That's want we want."
(http://eaves.ca/2009/09/30/three-law-of-open-government-data/)


=More Information=

[http://resource.org/8_principles.html 8 Principle of Open Government Data]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Politics]]