=Discussion=

Fryderyk Kwiatkowski:

"Three Types of Immanentization

Voegelin’s idea of the immanentization of the eschaton synthesizes his understanding of the threats of Gnosticism, and results from his interpretation of the Gnostic revolution as this-worldly. He distinguishes three types of immanentization: axiological, teleological, and activist mysticism. In the first variant, which Voegelin found for instance in Thomas More’s utopianism, the accent is placed on the anticipated state of perfection but the means through which this is going to be achieved are yet unknown. In axiological immanentization, the final state is understood negatively, that is when all the evil, suffering, death, and so forth, are eradicated. In the teleological type, the importance lies in the movement toward perfection without having a clear idea of how this ideal state will look like in detail. Voegelin recognizes this approach especially in progressivism in which the goal “may consist of no more than the idealization of this or that aspect of the situation, considered valuable by the thinker in question.” The third form of the immanentization, the activist mysticism, is exercised when the state of perfection is to be achieved through a revolutionary act of the complete transformation of human nature into its highest form. This type of immanentization incorporates the first two and Voegelin finds its clearest examples in movements stemming from the work of August Comte and Karl Marx. In Voegelin’s view, the immanentization can be seen as self-divinization that leads to re-divinization of the world, which was de-divinized by Western philosophy and Judeo-Christian tradition after a sacred and profane had been radically separated by Saint Augustine.

Voegelin does not, however, highly value Gnostic enterprises: “[a]ll gnostic movements are involved in the project of abolishing the constitution of being, with its origin in divine, transcendent being, and replacing it with a world-immanent order of being, the perfection of which lies in the realm of human action.” According to Voegelin, God is of a radically different substance than the creation, and thus transcendence and immanence cannot interpenetrate. Divinity is accessible only through faith, not experience, he argues, and for this reason Gnosticism is doomed to failure. Trying to “create the fantasy of a new world,” Gnostics eventually “killed God.” This move has led them to ceaseless fights about whose conception of the perfect society is correct. Voegelin argues that the twentieth century witnessed the bloody harvest of this Gnostic nihilism, reaped especially by the Nazi and communist regimes.

We can now briefly summarize our discussion on Voegelin’s philosophical theory. He utilized available scholarly materials on Gnosticism and created a normative category to discredit various modern ideologies (e.g., Hegelianism, psychoanalysis, or scientism) and political movements (e.g., fascism, communism). Despite having no evidence to support his claims, he argued that Gnostic ideas were historically transmitted through the works of people who felt alienated from the world and considered it imperfect and unjust. Moreover, his understanding of Gnosis cannot be reconciled with its most general scholarly sense, advocated by Jonas for example, which refers to the direct knowledge of God that is obtained through revelation. Positing that Gnosticism arose as a response to existential uncertainty that is fostered and sustained by the Augustinian vision of Christianity, Voegelin formulated one of the most controversial theses about theological roots of modernity. It encompassed so many phenomena, movements, and philosophical systems that could hardly be associated with ancient Gnosticism, as it was defined in classical scholarship. That is to say, immanentist eschatologies and their secular reinterpretations are incompatible with the most typical ancient Gnostic ideas, especially the belief in the transcendent God, regarded as the source of values and the ultimate aim of man’s spiritual pursuits. Thus, scholars have shown that Voegelin confused Gnosticism with apocalypticism and millenarism, and attached it to Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment enterprises.

In response to the criticism received both from historians of religion and philosophers, Voegelin reformulated his thesis in his later work and conceived Gnosis as “one component in the historical structure of modernity but no more than one,” and came to the conclusion that “[o]f equal importance (…) are apocalyptic, neo-Platonism, hermeticism, alchemy, and magic.” In The Ecumenic Age (1974), instead of seeing Gnostic ideas as nodes in the historical chain transmitted through literary means, Voegelin viewed them as equivalent expressions of consciousness. Although he introduced new distinctions and terminology, his diagnosis of Gnosticism as a manifestation of the “psychopathological” condition did not change. He continued to argue that its symbolic expressions mirrored the experience of people who tried to abolish insecurities of existence through Gnosis.

Having discussed key elements of Voegelin’s early Gnosis-thesis, we can turn to the analysis of Dark City and Pleasantville. In what follows, I will examine them by applying Voegelin’s six characteristics of the Gnostic attitude to show that the main characters in both films function as modern Gnostics. Numbers 1–6 appearing in parentheses inform that the characters analyzed fulfill the corresponding traits of the Gnostic attitude described by Voegelin."

(https://brill.com/view/journals/gnos/5/2/article-p220_4.xml)

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]