

=Discussion=

From: the book: The [[Power of Neighborhood and the Commons]]

PM:

==1 Public Services==



"For the whole infrastructure and the production
of existentially necessary goods the
present existing state must and can be transformed
into an institution of extended public
services on a larger-scale.

It is obvious that
more transparency and democratic participation
will be needed than today’s administrations
offer, more resilient structures.

States must also observe Ostrom’s rules of
governing the commons, which, in fact, are
nothing but principles of good governance.
To renounce on large scale social cooperation
because there is a risk of degeneration
into hierarchical power structures (Cf. Holloway)
is a form of defeatism and is not
compatible with the needs of the large urban
societies we live in.

From the initial function as an apparatus
of repression the modern state has gradually
been transformed into a cooperative
entity, in which each member contributes
what s/he can afford (taxes) and receives
what s/he needs (public services, from education
to loans and health care). Once inequalities
have been diminished and
oligarchic interests have disappeared,
states can in turn reduce their repressive
and governing functions (“power over”)
and become sober cooperative administrations
of things. The neo-liberal ideologues’
hatred directed at “the state” in any form
is conceivable when considering its cooperative
aspect and potential.

In the eyes of the neo-liberal predators the
very existence of the state is scandalous,
even more so of a state that has partly assumed
the role of an institution of the commons. The global financial crisis is being
used to destroy all the commons-aspects of
the state: in Greece, in Portugal, but also
in the still “healthy” regions of Europe.

Should we ever be confronted with local,
regional or global collapses, we won’t have
the time to establish fancy alternative models
of large-scale social cooperation
have been diminished and
oligarchic interests have disappeared,
states can in turn reduce their repressive
and governing functions (“power over”)
and become sober cooperative administrations
of things. The neo-liberal ideologues’
hatred directed at “the state” in any form
is conceivable when considering its cooperative
aspect and potential.

(We’re not talking here about small survivalist
projects in alternative niches.) We
must use what we have, and since the state
is available it can function again as a fallback
option. Let us reclaim the state
then!51 It s not the first time that this has
happened and can therefore happen again.)



==2 Food Subsistence==

Based on Agro-urban Neighborhoods
The household (from Greek oikos=house,
family+nomos = order) is the basis of any
economy and is therefore the first social
module of subsistence. Besides general,
public and industrial subsistence, housing,
food, clothing, everyday culture etc.
belong to the every-day life organizational
sphere of subsistence.

The second pillar of a post-growth society
are therefore subsistence communities on
the level of neighborhoods, that can, most
importantly, assume most of the food supply
and production. This sphere comprises
about one sixth of the overall economic activities
if we take current household expenses
as a reference. Neighborhoods are
the basic social module of a society based
on the commons.

The neighborhoods are the source of the
empowerment, the trust and the communicative
capacity that we need to determine
our own destiny. Neighborhoods
provide the social conditions to establish
attitudes and values that enable people to
make society sustainable."


==3 The Creative-Cooperative Sphere==

To be honest this sphere is a residual category.

It comprises all kinds of activities that
are made possible by public and communal
subsistence (the two other spheres).

It’s a creative-cooperative sector that must respect
the social and ecological guidelines,
but is characterized by the principle of free
association (or individuality). Activities in
this sphere can be individual or assume the
form of “club-commons,” cooperative
firms, foundations etc. Membership (Ostrom’s rule 1) is required, but access is
open in principle. Any form of exchange or
production can be tried out: markets,
bazaars, gifts, open workshops, fairs,
money, bartering etc. In this area trading
instead of sharing isn’t a systemic issue."
(http://www.o500.org/books/pm_power_of_neighborhood.pdf)


[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]