==Discussion==

Tere Vadén and Juha Suoranta:

“As we move toward more free modes of media and education,
we first encounter social media and education as entrepreneurship,
where the subjects are 'empowered' by active participation in
economically constrained activities. This is the first order of
freedom, in which free speech exists inside the confines of formal
freedom. Strangely enough, the road to more freedom comes
through realising that the economic constraints of liberal,
multicultural capitalism are not nearly strict enough. Only when
the ghost of exchange value is stripped off is the persistent and
non-symbolic use value revealed. In terms of media, this means
GNU/Linux or Wikipedia, which do not have any exchange value
but do have a tremendous utility. But even that is not enough in
terms of taking economics seriously: the oikos humanity is facing
is the planet and its resources. Native skills and indigenous
information need sustainable material lifestyles, which is
something the West has not been able to devise so far.

Thus the last two modes of freedom are linked to changes in the
modes of production, governance and property. These changes will
occur through the following three processes described by Michel
Bauwens (200J): use value will be produced 'through the free
cooperation of producers who have access to distributed capital' —
this is called 'the P2P [peer-to-peer] production mode', which
differs from a capitalist 'anything for-profit standard' and from
public production by state-owned enterprises. The purpose of the
P2P production mode is not to produce useless commodities or
'exchange value for a market, but use-value for a community of
users' (ibid.). The changes will also be 'governed by the community
of producers themselves, and not by market allocation or corporate
hierarchy: this is the P2P governance mode' (ibid.). In addition, they
'make use-value freely accessible on a universal basis, through new
common property regimes. This is its distribution or "peer
property mode": a "third mode of ownership", different from
private property or public (state) property' (ibid.).

A third mode of ownership demands that we who are working,
generally speaking, in the fields of education and public pedagogy
should, as Peter McLaren (2008: 477) points out, try to transform
the social relations of everyday life to a new social logic 'in terms
of criteria that are not already steeped in the logic of
commodification. Students can — and should — become resolute
and intransigent adversaries of the values that lie at the heart of
commodity capitalism. This implies building a new social culture,
control of work by the associated producers and also the very
transformation of the nature of work itself.”

(https://www.academia.edu/4189589/A_definition_and_criticism_of_cybercommunism)

== Visualisation ==
{| class="wikitable" style="border:3px solid black"
|+  style="font-size:larger; text-align:left" | Levels of freedom
|- 
! 
! Characteristics
! Media
! Education
|-
!rowspan="3" style="border-top:3px solid black"| Closed
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Exchange value
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Media as corporate business
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Education as an ideological state apparatus
|-
| Vehicle and content controlled
| Economic utility, control of content (business logic)
| Economic utility, control of content (educational policy)
|-
| Commoditisation<br />‘Crowdsourcing’
|
| Learning as having<br />Prolonged exchange value of well-educated citizens
|-
!rowspan="3" style="border-top:3px solid black"| First stage of freedom
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Economical utility, limited collaboration
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Web 2.0
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Educational content business
|-
| Market sphere, entrepreneurship, multicultural capitalism, liberal communism<br />Limited autonomy of content
| YouTube, Google, CitizenTV, Adbusters, etc.
| Teachers and students as commodified semi-objects (knowledge creators, consumers)
|-
| ‘Sharing’
| ‘Produsers’
| 
|-
!rowspan="3" style="border-top:3px solid black"| Double-Free
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Use value/value in itself
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Media as collaboration
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Education as collaboration
|-
| Full autonomy of content, limited autonomy of vehicle
| Wikis, Linux, P2P
| Freire, Selbstentfaltung
|-
| ‘Commonist’
| ‘Access to the Internet + power of the soviets’
| Learning as being<br />Reflective uncertainty
|-
!rowspan="4" style="border-top:3px solid black"| Triple-Free
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Value inseparable from the world, Aristotelian finalities
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| Immediate media practices
| style="border-top:3px solid black"| ‘Deschooling Society’ (Illich)
|-
| Full autonomy of content and vehicle
| Wikipedia + ecological autonomy + control of resources
| Learning by doing, native skills
|-
| Promoting other than materially-driven life forms
| 
| Students and teachers as human beings, ‘lifelong learners’ in an existential sense
|-
| ‘Communist’
| ‘Electricity + access to the internet + power of the soviets’
| Education as commons
|}

== More Information ==

See also [[Definition and Criticism of Cybercommunism]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons Policy]]
[[Category:Peerproduction]]