
'''Also called the Threefold Network, of which it is a part = "The biggest decentralized grid of self-managing Internet capacity in the world. Being built collectively by an inclusive ecosystem. Owned by everyone".'''

URL = https://threefold.io/

=Description=

"Autonomous IT drives the ThreeFold Network. It is reliable, secure, decentralized (scalable), sustainable, and versatile, enabling the handling of any IT workload. It is self-driving, self-healing, and requires minimal human intervention.

Autonomous IT is the building block for a new era of IT. Edge cloud computing, blockchain, IoT, 5G, Open Source, & DApps prove decentralization is happening. A decentralized grid of autonomous IT that lives on the edge is therefore needed to scale current IT workloads and support future ones. Further, it can provide solutions to the problems of digital monopolies, growing inequalities, and the loss of autonomy within our societies.

To our knowledge, we are the first to deliver a truly decentralized and autonomous solution."


=Characteristics=

==THREEFOLD GRID==

"ThreeFold Grid is an alternative to centralized cloud providers – a global, neutral, and sustainable network of autonomous storage and compute Internet capacity created by ThreeFold Farmers, with more than 40,000,000 GB and 15,000 cores existing today. Any application which can run on Linux can run on the ThreeFold Grid but with more privacy, security, closer to the end-user, and at a much lower cost.

Network Role: The Foundation / The Highway


==THREEFOLD TOKEN==

ThreeFold Token (TFT) is a decentralized digital currency used to buy autonomous and decentralized Internet services (compute, storage, applications) – generated only when active capacity is added to the ThreeFold Grid.

Network Role: The Medium of Exchange


==3BOT==

3Bot is a primary use case of what is possible on top of the ThreeFold Grid, and acts as your digital assistant. It can perform many tasks such as help you reserve capacity, transfer tokens, and run your workload(s) and applications. 3Bot is stateless and efficiently stores your data on the edge.

Network Role: Your Assistant"


[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]