

=Video 1=

Video via http://fora.tv/2010/06/09/Tim_Jackson_Prosperity_Without_Growth


"So much of the analysis of how we respond to climate change assumes that economic growth and emissions reduction are compatible goals. But is this wishful thinking? To question maximizing economic growth as an organizing principle of society seems close to economic heresy.

Enter Tim Jackson, a professor of Sustainable Development and author of the book, Prosperity Without Growth. He argues it's time to re-think the very notion of growth and what it means to be genuinely prosperous.

Jackson is speaking as part of the 2010 Alfred Deakin Lecture series, "Brave New World?" Curated by Tim Flannery, the 2010 Deakins presents the climate change challenge from ten different perspectives, with a focus on ten different spheres of life.

Are we, the series asks, willing to take the hard personal, political and economic choices that will truly reduce emissions? Are we brave enough to make the changes -- in thought and deed -- that are required of us? Are we able to shape this new world, or will it shape us?"


=Video 2=

Video via https://www.thinkdif.co/emf-stage/prosperity-without-growth-a-conversation-with-tim-jackson

"Having explored in depth the topic of our industrialised societies’ relationship with materials, as well as the need for gradual decoupling between development and resource impact, Tim Jackson joins the DIF and discusses the potential of the circular economy at scale. 

The global resonance of Tim’s work gave a center stage to a question which previously remained somewhat rhetoric: is a system rethink possible, and what are the key barriers standing in the way of both the private and the public sector? 

Alongside Tim, the Ellen MacArthur Foundation’s Joss Blériot and Ken Webster discuss the role of finance, money, policymakers and society in transitioning towards a positive model fit for the 21st century."


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Post-Growth]]