

=Discussion=


==Michel Bauwens==



==Sam Rose==

"I think the projections I've seen on P2P foundation list of "30
years","50 years" etc are too long for:

1. Radical change in biosphere (enough changes to cause significant
pressure on people employing industrial era approaches)

2. Shift to commons and p2p based approaches

An argument can be made that in as little as 10-15 years, multiple
pressures will coincide all at the same time. Peak oil figures are set
near 2030 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peak_oil  speed up of Arctic
and Antarctic thaw right now
http://news.yahoo.com/s/nm/20100404/sc_nm/us_climate_nitrous  by 2030
it is plausible that we will have already passed the tipping point for
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere affecting climates world wide.

Food and energy demand are projected to increase by 50% by 2030, fresh
water by 30%  http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/327/5967/812
India and China (2 most populous nations) both warn their populations
that their demand will outstrip their supplies severely by 2030
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_crisis  (links there to reports on
this subject)

Many food producing corporations that run industrial farming
operations are switching large scale agricultural production to
biofuel http://www.fwi.co.uk/Articles/2009/10/12/118291/Massive-increase-in-global-biofuel-production.htm
which can further increase food costs by raising commodity prices
worldwide, and causing food shortages. This price and biofuel
production increase is already happening now.

Meanwhile, multiple corporations are relentlessly pursuing total
control of communications infrastructure, (and already have total
control of) financial systems, energy and food distribution, etc

So, by 2030 (not later) it is plausible that we will already be in a
state where millions, if not billions will be marginalized by all
existing basic sustenance systems (food, water, energy, access).

Stuart Kauffman, and other complex systems theorists have shown that
in all systems, change tends to happen in an "s curve" fashion.
Kauffman uses a sandpile as an example in his book "At Home In The
Universe". He describes the data signature of a massive pile of sand
collapsing. First small bits fall of, then large chunks, then larger
and larger, faster and faster. The total rate of collapse towards the
end is exponentially faster than the beginning. I think we are seeing
the same with global human systems now, and that we are *now* in the
beginning time of collapse, with signals already present around the
world. This means we have maybe 15 years, starting *now*, to start
changing things in significant ways for at least 45% or more of people
on the earth. 45% minimum probably will get us enough inertia in the
opposite direction to slow down the momentum that is starting *now*."
(email, May 2010)


==Joss Winn==

"The growing consensus is that the peak of conventional oil was in 2005
and that the peak of all liquid fuels will be between 2010 - 2014.

I've summarised this and a few other things relating to climate,
technology and efficiency, here:

http://joss.blogs.lincoln.ac.uk/2010/02/12/revisiting-thinking-the-unthinkable/

Since writing that, a paper from an Oxford University research group
(including ex-Chief Scientific Advisor to UK gov, Sr. David King) has
added to the growing Peak Oil consensus.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.02.026

(email, May 2010)


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Biofuel]]