
=Description=

Hanart Forum:

"Time Waves contends that the empirical, concrete and phenomenal wave-like patterns of techno-capitalist history as well the media environment of electromagnetic vibrations are the expression of a deeper, more intrinsic reality, which is characterized by continuous wave-like change. 

This cosmo-ontology of the wave was rigorously articulated by certain figures of Chinese thought 

- Xiong Shili 熊⼗⼒ (1885–1968), 

- Tan Sitong 譚嗣同 (1865– 98), 

- Mou - Zongsan 牟宗三 (1909–95) - who turned to Buddhist, Daoist and Confucian ideas in their encounter technological modernity. 

Wave philosophy draws on these thinkers to imagine the cultivation of a future sentient city, the non-human agent of wireless media, tuning itself to the waves."

(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ap6iSPjrmo)


=Details=

Via ChatGPT:

Overview of the Three Chinese Scholars and Their Theories:

==1. Xiong Shili (熊十力, 1885–1968)==

Key Contributions:

Philosophical Background: Xiong Shili is a prominent figure in modern Chinese philosophy, known for integrating Confucian, Buddhist, and Daoist traditions.

Main Theory: He developed a unique interpretation of traditional Chinese metaphysics, emphasizing the dynamic and wave-like nature of reality.

Wave Theory: Xiong's philosophy posits that the universe is an ongoing process of transformation, characterized by continuous, wave-like patterns of change.


Key Works:

"New Treatise on Consciousness-Only" (唯識新論): This is Xiong's most influential work, where he discusses his ontological ideas and the wave-like nature of reality.

Secondary Sources: Scholars like John Makeham have written extensively on Xiong Shili’s contributions to Chinese philosophy.


==2. Tan Sitong (譚嗣同, 1865–1898)==

Key Contributions:

Philosophical Background: Tan Sitong was a reformist and intellectual during the late Qing dynasty. He sought to modernize China by integrating Western scientific concepts with traditional Chinese thought.

Main Theory: He is known for his radical ideas on political reform and his efforts to reconcile Confucian ethics with modern scientific understanding.

Wave Theory: Tan Sitong's thoughts on wave-like changes reflect his belief in the interconnectedness of all things and the continuous evolution of society and nature.

Key Works:

"An Exposition of Benevolence" (仁學): This text outlines Tan's views on Confucianism, reform, and the wave-like nature of social and cosmic change.

Secondary Sources: Works by authors like Wm. Theodore de Bary provide insights into Tan Sitong’s philosophy and historical impact.


==3. Mou Zongsan (牟宗三, 1909–1995)==

Key Contributions:

Philosophical Background: Mou Zongsan is a key figure in contemporary New Confucianism, known for his deep engagement with both Chinese and Western philosophical traditions.

Main Theory: He emphasized the importance of moral self-cultivation and the inherent moral nature of the cosmos.
Wave Theory: Mou’s interpretation of Confucian metaphysics includes the idea that moral and cosmic order is maintained through continuous, wave-like processes of self-renewal.

Key Works:

"Intellectual Intuition and Chinese Philosophy" (智的直覺與中國哲學): This work explores Mou's integration of Kantian epistemology with Confucian metaphysics.

Secondary Sources: Scholars such as Stephen C. Angle have analyzed Mou Zongsan’s contributions to Chinese thought.


[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]

[[Category:P2P Cycles]]

[[Category:China]]