

=Source=

* TIMELINE of EVOLUTIONARY SPIRITUALITY. Meet the pioneers of modern spirituality’s most provocative idea. By Tom Huston.

URL = ?


=Timeline=

==1600s==

* Jakob Böhme (1575–1624)

German shoemaker and mystic
The modern concept of evolutionary spirituality begins with Böhme, whose mystical
insights revealed to him that God is striving to develop a world of increasing wholeness
and perfection.

* G.W. Leibniz (1646–1716)

German polymath
Picking up where Böhme left off, Leibniz’s scientific and theological genius produced
the first broad conceptions of an evolution of biological species, which he saw as a
process ordained by God.


==1700s==

* Immanuel Kant (1724–1804)

German philosopher
A student of the works of Leibniz, Kant explored the idea that God’s physical laws are
working to fashion the material world “by a natural evolution into a more perfect
constitution.”

* J.B. Robinet (1735–1820)

French philosopher
Ultimately derided for his belief in mermaids, Robinet was among the first to explore the
idea that evolution is driven by a spiritual energy or “force.”

* Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832)

German polymath
Embracing evolution as a spiritual process, Goethe’s theory of the development of plant
morphology inspired both philosopher Friedrich Schelling and naturalist Charles Darwin.

* J.G. Fichte (1762–1814)

German philosopher
A student and reinterpreter of Kant, Fichte proposed that both subjective mind and
objective nature are the evolving ephemeral expressions of a transcendent consciousness.


==1800s==

* F.W.J. Schelling (1775–1854)

German philosopher
Schelling, a student of Fichte, fused the mysticism of Böhme and the logic of Leibniz
into an unprecedented vision of cosmic evolution that saw God fully pervading all levels
of being.

* G.W.F. Hegel (1770–1831)
German philosopher
Schelling’s erstwhile friend and professional rival achieved widespread acclaim for his
in-depth treatises on Spirit as the guiding power behind humanity’s cultural development.

* Lorenz Oken (1779–1851)
German naturalist
A student of Schelling, Oken’s scientific theories expanded on his mentor’s philosophy,
proposing a mystical impulse behind the evolutionary transformations of living species.

* Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860)

German philosopher
Another of Hegel’s rivals, he combined Eastern mysticism and Kantian idealism into a
philosophy that made the evolutionary impulse, or “will to live,” a fundamental tenet of
existence.

* Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882)

American essayist
Profoundly influenced by German idealism, Emerson’s transcendentalism synthesized the
Eastern notion of karma with the Western concept of evolution.

* Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913)

English naturalist
Wallace famously developed his own theory of natural selection contemporaneously with
Darwin, but he held that evolution also had a spiritual dimension.

* Helena Blavatsky (1831-1891)

Ukrainian Theosophist
Founder of the Theosophical Society, she was largely responsible for the resurgence of
occult thought and the popularization of an esoteric form of evolutionary spirituality in
the late nineteenth century.


==1900s==

* Richard M. Bucke (1837–1902)

Canadian psychiatrist
Following an experience of “cosmic consciousness,” Bucke composed a comprehensive
chronicle of the evolutionary history and future potential of the human psyche.

* William James (1842–1910)

American psychologist
One of modernity’s foremost authorities on mystical experience, James applied an
evolutionary perspective to the study of psychology and the development of
consciousness.

* Henri Bergson (1859–1941)

French philosopher
Bergson’s concept of the élan vital, or a “vital force,” behind the evolutionary process
fueled his masterful writings, for which he earned the 1927 Nobel Prize in literature.

* Rudolf Steiner (1861–1925)

Austrian polymath
Esotericism gained new notoriety through the work of Steiner, who wrote about the
spiritual evolution of humankind from an occult and astrological perspective.

* Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947)

English mathematician and philosopher
Whitehead’s influential “process philosophy” essentially redefined God as a process
inseparable from the evolution of the material universe.

* Swami Vivekananda (1863–1902)

Indian mystic
Having introduced Hindu mysticism to the West, he found no incompatibility between
Eastern concepts of spiritual growth and Darwin’s evolutionary theory.

* Sri Aurobindo (1872–1950)

Indian mystic-philosopher
This enlightened thinker created a comprehensive synthesis of Eastern and Western 
philosophies and redefined spiritual practice as a conscious engagement with evolution
itself.

* The Mother (1878–1973)

French mystic
An esoteric evolutionist and spiritual partner of Sri Aurobindo, she saw evolution leading
to a fundamental cellular transformation that would give rise to a new human species.

* Alice Bailey (1880–1949)

English Neo-Theosophist
Expanding on the ideas of Blavatsky, Steiner, and other occult thinkers, Bailey’s writings
laid the foundation for many New Age notions of spiritual evolution.

* Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (1881–1955)

French priest and paleontologist
Influential beyond his lifetime, Teilhard challenged rigid dogmatisms in both mainstream
science and Christianity with his inspired vision of the evolutionary destiny of human
consciousness.

* Julian Huxley (1887–1975)

English biologist
Member of the distinguished Huxley family, he popularized the idea that humanity is the
first known species in which the evolving universe has become self-aware.

* Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan (1888–1975)

Indian president
This statesman and scholar promoted the philosophy of German idealism alongside
Eastern mysticism as he advocated an evolutionary vision for humanity.

* Gerald Heard (1889–1971)
English historian
Heard’s studies on how individual consciousness evolves through focused intention led
him to postulate the emergence of “leptoid man,” or human beings who have “leapt” to a
higher state of being.

* Dane Rudhyar (1895-1985)

French astrologer
Master of many disciplines, including music and astrology, Rudhyar saw evolution
leading to a global awakening, which he outlined in his 1970 book The Planetarization of
Consciousness.

* Jean Gebser (1905–1973)

German cultural theorist
An influential forefather of contemporary “integral” theories of development, Gebser’s
pioneering work focused on the evolution of human society, which he traced through five
distinct stages of consciousness.

* Arthur M. Young (1905–1995)

American inventor and philosopher
After developing the first commercial helicopter, Young’s innovative mind lifted off into
the realm of cosmology and metaphysics to devise a new evolutionary theory of
consciousness.


==2000s==

Tom Hudson:

With many contemporary thinkers contributing important new insights to this everchanging field, the history of evolutionary spirituality is still being written . . .
(And I would note: Among whom we could include Barbara Marx Hubbard, Elisabet
Sahtouris, Thomas Berry, Brian Swimme, Ken Wilber, Allan Combs, Beatrice Bruteau,
Michael Dowd, Connie Barlow, Craig Hamilton, Andrew Cohen, Henryk Skolimowski,
Jean Houston, John Stewart, and many others)


=More information=

* [[Future of God]] :Special Issue of: 'What is Enligthenment' magazine, #21, 
* [[Will God Survive the 21st Century]]: Special issue of What Is Enligthenment magazine, #23.

[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]