

'''Book: Time Wars: The Primary Conflict in Human History. Jeremy Rifkin.'''

URL = http://www.foet.org/books/time-wars.html

=Description=

"Time Wars: Not since Rachel Carson's Silent Spring has one book tackled a
subject of such importance. A battle is now brewing over our present
conception of time. Its outcome will help determine the future of our
society in the coming century. On one side are the power-time advocates, who
would have us enter a hyperefficient computerized world where time is taken
beyond human conception and recorded in nanoseconds (billionths of a
second)-an artificial time world where past, present, and future blur
together to create a simulated paradise divorced from the organic and
seasonal time orientation of the planet. On the other side stand the time
rebels, who question society's capitulation to the nanosecond time frame.

They argue instead for an ecological time orientation that would
resynchronize our social and economic activities to the biological and
physical rhythms of the natural world. Just as the "small is beautiful" idea
challenged the myth that "bigger is better," the new ecological time vision,
"slow is humane," challenges the prevailing view that increased speed and
efficiency automatically mean progress. The distinguishing feature of any
society is its use of time, posits the author. Even before the Middle Ages
when bells of the Benedictines first ordered the lives of monks, to the
clocks and schedules, computers and programs of today, individuals have been
organized into time-regulated groups as a requirement for social and
economic security. Jeremy Rifkin provides a context for the emerging "time
wars" by arguing that the great political battles in history have been waged
over competing temporal visions. The author surveys Western culture and
concludes that changes in civilization take place only with corresponding
changes in our conception of time. In the process Rifkin offers persuasive
evidence to demonstrate what happens to our species when time is snatched
from its biological and environmental moorings. Time Wars is for everyone
who wonders why, in a culture that is so intent on saving time, we find so
little time left for ourselves and for each other." 


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Politics]]