'''* Essay: Time in the Age of Complexity. Kingsley Dennis.'''

URL = http://kingsleydennis.files.wordpress.com/2010/07/time-in-the-age-of-complexity-kd-version.pdf


=Abstract=

"This paper examines the
intensification of time through the lens of [[Complexity Theory]] and argues that
increasingly networked infrastructures are moving towards an integrated
global complexity in real-time. I suggest that shifts in physical-digital
temporality are having a significant effect upon how the ‘social’ is being reconfigured."


Kingsley Dennis:

"This paper addresses how emerging environments of embedded physical-digital
networks, and increasingly wireless connectivity, are informing new
complexities in relationships of time and space. I also discuss shifts towards
ubiquitous ‘everywhere’ computing and digitally-embedded environments
where complex interrelations and interdependencies between person-object-environment
in-form a more pervasive complex system. Such complex
arrangements are incorporating increased awareness, reflexivity, creativity,
and inclusion. Further, that these developments in informational connectivity
and pervasive computing are having a significant effect upon notions of
temporality, such as the shift towards merging ‘real-time’ into physical-digital
relations. Whilst facilitating mobility these ‘real-time’ complex configurations
may also manifest contestations of power.

This paper focuses specifically on the technologies of communication that are
re-configuring relations of connectivity, communication, and time. I also
examine how these increasingly pervasive computerised networks are informing
sites of complex ‘real-time’, and what this real-time implies for both
mobility and power. I turn now to examine temporal considerations within a
framework of complex in-formations of information technologies and
ubiquitous computing."


[[Category:Relational]]