'''Book: 24/7. Time and Temporality in the Network Society. Edited by Robert Hassan and Ronald E. Purser. Stanford University Press, 2007'''

==Description==

"For better or worse, the information and communication revolution has transformed our economic, cultural, and political world. On an individual scale, many of the traditional social, political, and cultural habits of mind and ways of being that evolved under the regime of the clock are changing rapidly, including the way individuals save, spend, and optimize time. At the organizational level, the pacing of innovation, levels of production, and new product development, are no longer temporally fixed due to the effects of living in a networked society and in the networked economy. 24/7 brings together leading thinkers from a variety of disciplines to analyze the differing relationships to time in an accelerated society. Offering much-needed insight and perspective into new issues and problems, this unique volume is the first to offer a wide range of cutting-edge thought on the new economic, cultural, and political world of the networked society. The book includes contributions from the leading scholars in this area, such as Barbara Adam, Mike Crang, Thomas Hylland Erikson, and Geert Lovink.

Robert Hassan is a Research Fellow in the Media and Communications Program at the University of Melbourne. Ronald E. Purser is a Professor of Management in the College of Business at San Francisco State University."
(http://www.sciy.org/blog/INTROtoSCIY/RichCarlson/_archives/2007/9/13/3227095.html)

==General Discussion on Time===

Jose Arguelles:

"humanity learned how to mechanize time. The mechanization of time created an unconscious mental field in which the human systematically separated itself from nature for the purpose of creating a vast industrialized order, the technosphere -- a sphere of artificial time cast over the biosphere. Since 1618, the human species has been living in its own artificial time, apart from the rest of the biosphere that continues to operate in the natural cycles. The dissonance between artificial and natural time has brought about the present crisis -- and pushed mankind toward a new condition of being."
(http://www.realitysandwich.com/2012_now_everybodys_mind)




[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Relational]]