== Bio ==

Tine De Moor (PhD; Ghent, Antwerp, and London) is professor “Social Enterprise and Institutions for Collective Action” at the department of Business-Society Management at the Rotterdam School of Management (RSM), Erasmus University Rotterdam. At her previous position as professor of Institutions for Collective Action in historical perspective at the Faculty of Humanities at Utrecht University, she started using an interdisciplinary approach for the study of the long-term evolution of rural commons. De Moor has been able to revise the historical basis of the widely debated metaphor of the [[Tragedy of the Commons]], as launched in 1968 by G. Hardin. Whereas from a modern-day perspective the flaws in Hardin’s theory have been well-documented, the historical deficiencies in his theory were hardly ever studied. De Moor’s research, combined with extensive empirical research and analysis with explicit modelling and a strongly developed theoretical framework, has been published in several books and journals. She has been actively involved in developing innovative research methods. Besides, she is the co-founder of the peer-reviewed journal the [[International Journal of the Commons]], and she has been member of the Executive council of the [[International Association for the Study of the Commons]] since 2008; in 2014, she was elected as President-Elect of the IASC, taking office as President on January 15, 2015. De Moor is currently in charge of or involved in several projects on institutions for collective action, of which several were awarded by an ERC Starting Grant and both VIDI and VICI Grants by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO). In 2023, De Moor and her team won the [https://www.eur.nl/en/news/winners-announced-eur-open-and-responsible-science-awards Open and Responsible Science Award], category societal engagement, of Erasmus University.

— ''taken from https://collective-action.info/_ctc_main/_tea_main/_tea_tinedemoor/ 2025''

"As a historian and environmental scientist my main interest goes to understanding why people set-up commons and other forms of institutions for collective action and how they manage to make their initiatives durable and resilient, why these institutions survive and thrive over the (very) long run. 
Many [[International Association for the Study of the Commons|IASC]]-scholars have contributed to understanding these issues, many of whom have been working in Less Developed Countries where institutions for collective often still play an important role in daily live. 
However, in particular in times of political, economic and ecologic crises as we know today, it becomes clear that such institutions can also make a difference and can be a viable alternative in developed countries as well, where the principles of self-governance and cooperation have to a large extent been erased from the collective memory. 
And yet, there is a lot to learn from both the historical examples that have managed to survive centuries as from the present-day examples elsewhere, which are at the core of the 
[[International Association for the Study of the Commons|IASC]]’s members’ interest. 
Being based in the Netherlands &amp; Belgium, I witness on a daily basis new initiatives being set-up by “normal” citizens who choose collective action for an alternative model for their provision in energy, care, culture and other goods and services (see [http://www.collective-action.info/_ICA_Today_Examples http://www.collective-action.info/_ICA_Today_Examples] and http://www.iasc-commons.org/impact-stories for examples). 
New cooperatives and other types of collective governance, consumption and production play today a key role in dealing with the failure of the market and the retreat of the welfare state. 
In dealing with these problems, European citizens rediscover self-governing institutions as a durable and well-functioning alternative. 
But these citizens also crave for knowledge, guidance in how to run such a self-governing institution. 
With our team in Utrecht, we support such initiatives with knowledge derived from our historical studies but also by demonstrating that much of the knowledge they need is already out there among the daily practitioners of the commons in Africa, Asia, Latin America. 
Our intention here is to more explicitly “reverse the knowledge chain” and find the knowledge where it is daily practiced. 
This process will also give more visibility to “knowledge common” the [[International Association for the Study of the Commons|IASC]] itself already is. 
The [[International Association for the Study of the Commons|IASC]] forms the ideal network environment to identify where the knowledge on self-governance, on cooperation and participation (and much more) that is needed is present - whether among scholars or practitioners - and to bring it where it is needed.

I have been active in the Association since 2001 and served on the Executive Council from 2008 until present. 
From 2003 onwards I prepared, together with Erling Berge, the launch of the International Journal of the Commons in 2007, remained editor until the year after and I’m still a member of the editorial board. 
In 2006, I organized with Giangiacomo Bravo the regional European Conference of the [[International Association for the Study of the Commons|IASC]] in Brescia. 
I am also a board member of the Elinor Ostrom Award for Collective Governance of Common Resources. 
Trained as a historian (Ghent, London) and environmental scientist (Antwerp) (Ph.D. history from Ghent University (Belgium), I am Full Professor on a chair entitled “Institutions for collective action in historical perspective” at Utrecht University in the Netherlands where I lead an interdisciplinary team of researchers on this topic, within the department of social and economic history. 
As one of the scholars involved in the Interdisciplinary Knowledge Institute “Institutions of the Open Society”, I have received a number of large research grants on commons and related issues. 
I have published in journals and books with varying disciplinary background, but most of my work deals with commons and other aspects of long-term change in Europe; besides I supervise research on cooperation and economic history in other parts of the world as well (Uganda, Uruguay). 
For further information about the research of our team, see: [http://www.collective-action.info www.collective-action.info]."

— ''taken from www.iasc-commons.org/about/current-officers in 2017''

== More Information ==

* [[Homo Cooperans]] (booklet of inaugural lecture, 2013)
* [[Craft Guilds]]
* [[Corporate Collective Action]]
* [[International Association for the Study of the Commons]] (IASC)
* [[Shared Patterns in Long-Term Dynamics of Commons as Institutions]]
* [[Marken]]

* [https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tine_De_Moor Dutch Wikipedia page]
* [https://collective-action.info/_ctc_main/_tea_main/_tea_tinedemoor/ page at Institutions for Collection Action]

* [https://www.rsm.nl/people/tine-de-moor/ page at Rotterdam School of Management] including publications.

* [https://www.linkedin.com/in/tine-de-moor-a341b619/ LinkedIn page]

[[Category:P2P_Women]]
[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Belgium]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Commons]]