'''= project by Anneloes Smitsman: "TPS identifies 12 interdependent spheres of impact that contain major tipping point potentials, which contribute to civilizationa transformation".'''

URL = https://www.earthwisecentre.org/ 

"Applying time-tested indigenous wisdom and methods at scale, using the latest technological advancements available – consciously, courageously and meticulously – is the best chance we have for civilizational transformation." [https://www.earthwisecentre.org/tps]


=Description=

"The Tipping Point System (TPS) provides a concrete answer to the question, how does humanity change its destrucive business-as-usual trajectory?
TPS is an all-encompassing strategic and holistic response to the human condition that can move us from dread to thrivability, from catastrophe to transformation, from helplessness to action and from fear to hope - with music and cultural festivals playing a key role in catalyzing this transformation, backed by a strong scientific evidence-based approach and based on indigenous wisdom. TPS identifies 12 interdependent spheres of impact that contain major tipping point potentials, which either contribute to civilizational collapse (if business as usual continues), or else can become the tipping point for civilizational transformation. The TPS Partnership Alliance brings together leading organisations and evolutionary change agents from around the world to build a world that works, and gifts our children a thrivable future."
(https://www.earthwisecentre.org/)


=Characteristics=

"TIPPING POINT POSTULATES

These are the things we believe to be true, and they form the basis for all our reasoning, discussion and planning.

#We are in the greatest transition time humanity has ever experienced.
#The outcome is unclear, but could take one of 3 paths: civilisational collapse and extinction, incremental evolution, or civilizational transformation.
#Many of the oldest living (indigenous) cultures have faced their own extinction events and have survived the collapse of empires over thousands of years. 
#Applying time-tested indigenous wisdom and methods at scale, using the latest technological advancements available – consciously, courageously and meticulously – is the best chance we have for civilizational transformation.
#Top-down methods of decision-making and governance are now incapable of coping with the complexities humanity faces. The alternative is to embrace indigenous methods of dealing with complexity, which include: Creation Songs, Music, Dance, Storytelling, Ceremony, Visioning, Dreaming, Rites of Passage & #Initiation, Collective Leadership, Co-Creative Partnership, and Wisdom Councils. #Music4Change
#Consciously and intentionally combining indigenous methods and principles with the best scientific, systemic, educational, and entrepreneurial knowledge currently available makes possible a Third Way, which is neither 'technologically superior' nor 'indigenous'.
#This conscious combination forms and informs the living architecture of an intentional Tipping Point System, designed to allow collective wisdom to emerge, blossom and flourish in service of the greatest transition time ever, for the birth of a new era."

(https://www.earthwisecentre.org/tps)


=More information=

'''* Article: [[On the Origin of Planetary-Scale Tipping Points]]. By Timothy M. Lenton and Hywel T.P. Williams. Part of Focus Issue: Is there a global tipping point for planet Earth? Trends in Ecology & Evolution, Volume 28, Issue 7, July 2013, Pages 380-382''' [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2013.06.001 doi]

URL = https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0169534713001456

"[[Tipping Points]] are recognized in many systems, including ecosystems and elements of the climate system. But can the biosphere as a whole tip and, if so, how? Past global tipping points were rare and occurred in the coupled planetary-scale dynamics of the Earth system, not in the local-scale dynamics of its weakly interacting component ecosystems. Yet, evolutionary innovations have triggered past global transformations, suggesting that tipping point theory needs to go beyond bifurcations and networks to include evolution."

[[Category:Facilitation]]
[[Category:Existential Risk]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]