
'''= "Tiny Vertical Axis Wind Turbine", a "tiny wind turbine prototyping platform".'''

URL =


=Description=

'''1.'''

"The Tiny Vertical Axis Wind Turbine is a wind energy harvesting and testing platform for anybody. All information is released open source and for free, for a better world and for the fun of open collaboration. (CC BY-SA)

Part of the modular Wind Turbine system is a downscaled VAWT called TiVA with tiny dimensions. With these inexpensive, small prototypes we can have a fast prototyping and research pace. Any successful design approaches may then be scaled up and used at larger turbines. TiVA is also a prototyping platform for educational purposes: Students, teachers, hackers and anybody with interest in the topic can learn and tinker with renewable energy harvesting in a small scale."
(http://wiki.opensourceecology.de/TiVA)


'''2.''' 

"The Tiny Vertical Axis Wind Turbine is a wind energy harvesting and testing platform for anybody. All information is released open source and for free, for a better world and for the fun of open collaboration. (CC BY-SA)

Part of the modular Wind Turbine system of Open Source Ecology Germany is a downscaled VAWT called TiVA with tiny dimensions. With these inexpensive, small prototypes we can have a fast prototyping and research pace. Any successful design approaches may then be scaled up and used at larger turbines. TiVA is also a prototyping platform for educational purposes: Students, teachers, hackers and anybody with interest in the topic can learn and tinker with renewable energy harvesting in a small scale.

CAD, CAM, FEA, renewable energies, power electronics, circuit design, PCB layout, hard- and software design, conventional and CNC machining."
(http://etemu.com/)


=Status=

"The TiVA is currently in the research phase of product development, we are focusing on the dimensions and design of it's single components right now with 3D modeling and simulation parallel with the real life prototyping: We encourage the use of CAE, are working with 2D/3D CAD, and made first steps in simulating with CFD + FEA. We try to minimize it with designing and calculating as much as possible, but real life testing is of course very important, too. A wooden rotor base with bearings has already been machined, NACA0018 wings have been prototyped and tested. First results are, that lift profiles like the NACA0018 airfoil are very inefficient at small turbine dimensions and low wind speeds, but efficient at large dimensions and medium to high wind speeds. This is because the critical Reynolds number can be accomplished at a large diameter, but not at a small turbine."
(http://wiki.opensourceecology.de/TiVA)


=More Information=

* the [[Open Source Ecology Wind Turbine]], http://wiki.opensourceecology.de/Wind_Turbine/en, is based on TiVA


[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Energy]]