
= guild-inspired group for open source developers who work for Facebook and other corporate entities


=Description=

BY CADE METZ:

"(James) Pearce felt a very real need for something akin to an open source software guild, so much so that he and Facebook have now started one. Known as TODO, this new group made its debut yesterday at an event for hardcore web engineers hosted by Facebook, and it spans some of the biggest names in tech, including Google, Twitter, Dropbox, and GitHub. In one sense, this is a small thing. But in the long run, given the egalitarian nature of open source software, it could benefit practically any company that relies on computer code.

A backronym for “talk openly, develop openly,” TODO aspires to fine tune the world of open source software, so that companies can more easily build online services for the modern age—and more easily share the tools they use to build such services. The hope is that this new-age guild will create a kind of feedback loop that will significantly expand the use of open source software, software that’s freely available to everyone.

“This group wants to help make open source better,” Pearce says. And it’s in a position to do so. Today, the most important open source tools emerge from the online companies like Facebook, companies building software to solve problems no one else has ever faced.

There are many cross-company organizations focused on promoting open source software, including The Linux Foundation, the Apache Software Foundation, and the Free Software Foundation. But these are rather different from TODO. An independent organization like The Linux Foundation is a non-profit that oversees the development of particular open source software tools, such as the Linux operating system, the OS used to run so many of today’s web services. By contrast, TODO is meant to help companies like Facebook and Google manage how they use of open source software and how they run their own their own open source projects—projects that freely share the custom software they’ve created to run their online operations.

Facebook, for instance, uses a wide range of seasoned open source software tools, from Linux to the MySQL database. But it has also built a wide range of tools needed to operate its worldwide social network, including everything from new databases to new tools for executing software code, and it has open sourced many of these, hoping that others can use them too—and help improve them by submitting additional code. With TODO, the company hopes to streamline how this software is shared with the larger world and, in the long run, ensure it get used by more people.

As Pearce explains, running an open source project isn’t an easy thing. Facebook produces new software code for its own online empire on a daily basis, and it can’t just lob this code onto the internet for others to use. Basically, Facebook needs are somewhat different from other companies—for one thing, it moves at a much faster pace—and that means it must develop additional tools for testing and managing code that gets shared online. “This is hard problem,” he says. But TODO, he believes, can help make it easier.

TODO isn’t something the world of open source has seen before, says Chris Kelly, the head of open source at GitHub. “This is somewhere in a new space that doesn’t really exist yet,” he says. “It’s a new domain for us—a new wave for open source.” The organization is still working out how it will operate. But the basic idea is that—rather than continually building new tools for using, testing, and sharing open source software—these companies can freely trade practices with each other. “We just don’t want to re-invent the wheel many times,” Kelly says.

For people like Kelly and Pearce, this sort of thing makes immediate sense. Their job is oversee the many open source projects their companies juggles, and TODO makes that job easier. To others, the project may be difficult to understand, but in the long run, the results could be significant. At the simplest level, it can help all companies understand what open source tools they should use to build their online operations and how they should use it. As Pearce explains, the TODO members might even create a directory of open source projects that they recommend—projects that meet a certain “quality bar.”

Today, the range of open source projects is enormous. The trick, for any company, lies in choosing the right one for the right task, and TODO can help with this—at least in theory. As Kelly says: “What we want to do is provide guidelines that, if you are adopting a project that is supported by this organization, you know what you’re getting. You know that test coverage is healthy, that there’s a community lead and ownership around it, there’s engineering resources dedicated to it. You know: ‘This is something I can adopt and put it into a production system and be comfortable using it.’”

But what this project can also do is help show a wide range of companies how they too can open source the software they build. TODO can, well, expand the scope of TODO, from companies like Google and Facebook and Twitter to all sorts of other businesses. Walmart is already a member, and the hope is that the group’s reach will extend to other companies outside the Silicon Valley elite—and perhaps to companies outside the tech game. “The current set of member is Silicon Valley oriented,” Pearce says. “But we know that there companies in all sorts of other sectors that have a desire to open up. Maybe there individuals in an old fashioned car company somewhere that want to open source some of their software, and they don’t know where to start.”
(http://www.wired.com/2014/09/medieval-style-guilds-will-remake-tech-behind-facebook-google/)


[[Category:Peergovernance]]