'''= "The Token Engineering Commons (TEC) is an open source and collectively governed project that aims to create a token economy that will accelerate the responsible & ethical creation of public goods".''' [https://medium.com/token-engineering-commons/kicking-off-the-token-engineering-commons-be6a253cba81]


=Description=

1.  "The TE Commons is an intentionally-designed, dynamic relationship between the TEC token holders, the resources they collectively hold, and the protocols that govern their interactions. By protocols, namely, this includes the smart contracts that tokenize the use of funds as well as the culture and social norms of the token holders that use tokens to fund projects."
(https://medium.com/token-engineering-commons/kicking-off-the-token-engineering-commons-be6a253cba81)


'''2. Kris Decoodt:'''

"We have an invitation to the community today. We’ve realized that blockchain research and development is a public good as well, it’s also a commons. It’s providing public goods for the entire community to use: it’s non-rivalrous, it’s inclusive, and therefore it falls prey to the free-rider problem as well. We need an ecosystem-funding DAO to push forward token engineering R&D in the blockchain space. Our invitation to the token engineering community is to come together as a DAO once the tech is ready and launch the Token Engineering Commons (TEC). This will be the first commons that we hope will be launched, using the Augmented Bonding Curve. Many of the token engineers today are working separately, getting by on client work, doing token engineering research in their spare time. This work is crucial, and we believe it needs to be done, it will push the ecosystem into the next level of maturity. '''The Token Engineering Commons will provide a sustainable funding mechanism to unite these researchers around the common cause of maturing this industry'''.
(https://medium.com/commonsstack/the-commons-stack-scaling-the-commons-to-re-prioritize-people-and-the-planet-e1293123831d)


=Status=

* Technical roadmap, related to the [[Commons Stack]] project, [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ouFisWOfJgqi7nQODvXQqNg0T49jmZGZalPFvpB121c/edit#heading=h.ajnjosxfnsti]

'''Near-Term Mission:'''

"Our primary goal, in the near term, is to launch Token Engineering Commons (TEC), and operating, with a resilient culture once launched, the TEC (smart contracts and culture built around it) will align incentives around advancing the token engineering discipline. There are a many requirements to fulfill, these are just some of the most important:

* The TEC will be launched by a Trusted Seed, a critical mass of token engineering, decentralized governance, and commons management “experts.”
* The TEC will consist of an Augmented Bonding Curve (or similar bonding curve) feeding into a community pool of funds that can be disbursed using Conviction Funding.
* The Token Engineering Commons will be able to be upgradable so that it can improve upon its initial design.


The cultural and technical build are currently happening to ensure a successful launch of the TEC and are the focus, until they are completed and the TEC is allocating funding to support TE Public Goods.


'''Long-Term Mission'''

The TE Commons mission is to gather and steward the efficient distribution of funds to projects in the emerging field of token engineering to encourage the robust and ethical design of tokenized infrastructures. The TE Commons will curate and connect projects to the resources they need, while also evolving and maintaining our own healthy culture & regenerative infrastructure where capital supports contributions, contributions create value, value empowers token engineers, and people who appreciate token engineers being empowered contribute capital of all sorts."
(https://medium.com/token-engineering-commons/kicking-off-the-token-engineering-commons-be6a253cba81)

=More information=

* [[Contributory Accounting Mechanisms in Blockchain Communities]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]
[[Category:Peerfunding]]
[[Category:Commons]]