
=Discussion=

Forefront, Tokenized Communities Year in Review, 2022:

"If you look close enough, you might argue that 2022 was the year of the metalabel, and you wouldn’t be wrong.

'''A metalabel is a release club where groups of people who share the same interests collaborate to drop and support work together.''' A metalabel is a lightweight structure that creates economic, emotional, and creative alignment between collaborators. A metalabel could be a tokenized community, and many are.

Metalabel, the company by the same name that coined the term, is building tools and models to help promote the development and production of metalabels worldwide. In many ways, though, the hard work was giving words to define a type of community that already existed.

Songcamp, for example, is an artists’ collective launched in March 2021 that took the year by storm in 2022 with Camp CHAOS. The “headless band” of over 80 musicians, producers, designers, and operatives came together to create over 40 songs, generating over half a million dollars in NFT sales, which were split amongst the bands’ participants.

Songcamp wasn’t the only music community to take advantage of web3 tools. 2022 saw the dawn of music collector communities, decentralized record labels, nounish music DAOs, and much more. In many ways, music is one craft that is embracing web3 in its entirety and experimenting with no limits."

(https://review.forefront.market/)

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]

[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:Music]]