
=Description=

"Token engineering is a cross-disciplinary field that draws from established practices in systems, electrical, robotics & controls engineering, and more. It also draws from fields as diverse as Behavioural & Ecological Economics, Operations Research, AI & Optimization, as explored by Shermin Voshmgir & Michael Zargham in this paper on the [[Foundations of Cryptoeconomic Systems]]. It is a methodology that goes all the way from ideation to design, modeling, simulation, testing, deployment, and maintentance. It's the process of building crypto-economic systems that work, and keep working. Just like other public infrastructure like bridges and power grids, our future economic systems also need to be rigorously designed to be reliable under widely varying conditions. The goal of token engineering is to design and create token-economic systems that are robust against exploits, unintended consequences and cascade failures, in order to protect and empower users."

(https://tokenengineeringcommunity.github.io/website/docs/getting-started-welcome/)


=More information=

* [[Token Engineering Commons]]

* What is Token Engineering? A Stakeholder Study. Livia Deschermayer, Lisa Wocken, and Nathalia Scherer.

URL = https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/xw48b

"This study provides a tangible understanding of the emerging discipline of token engineering, its process, and its aims. Rooted in a qualitative constructivist grounded theory approach, the research involved conducting 41 in-depth interviews with stakeholders across the field between March and June 2023. Three social researchers constantly compared and analyzed the collected data to produce insights structuring this report so others can challenge and build upon it. This study represents the first of its kind in token engineering."

[[Category:Crypto Economy]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Technology]]