
Tom Atlee = founder of the non-profit Co-Intelligence Institute

Photo link: http://www.co-intelligence.org/images/tom.jpg

=Bio=

"Tom Atlee, founder of the non-profit Co-Intelligence Institute, has written and spoken for twenty years on politics, democracy and cultural transformation.
His two resource packed websites - co-intelligence.org and democracy innovations.org - are used by thousands of people every month, and a thousand of them subscribe to his email newsletter. Tom's articles on social issues and co-intelligence have appeared in National Civic Review, Communities, Co-Op America Quarterly, IONS Noetic Sciences Review, In Context, Yes!, Permaculture Activist, Earthlight, Thinkpeace and numerous other journals.
 
Raised in a Quaker activist family, Tom has been exploring social issues and personal and social transformation since an early age. His participation in the nine-month cross-country Great Peace March of 1986 marked a watershed in his life. He has served on the boards of the Berkeley Ecology Center and the Center for Group Learning. In 1991 he was invited to Belize and to Czechoslovakia (with his life partner, Karen Mercer) to consult on green social change and community-building. Tom lives in Eugene, Oregon, with Karen and several of their friends. In his rare departures from his desk, he takes aerobic walks, bikes to the post office, plays twelve-string guitar and writes an occasional poem or song. His daughter Jennifer Atlee, a green product design engineer, lives and works around New England.

Tom Atlee can be contacted at cii@igc.org"
(http://www.taoofdemocracy.com/AuthorBio.html)

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Democracy]]