

=Bio=

'''1.'''

(Croatia).Member of Multimedia Institute/MAMA in Zagreb where he organizes theory and publishing activities, project lead of Creative Commons Croatia. He's an activist of Right to the City Zagreb. His interests focus on constellations of contemporary philosophy, media theory and aesthetics. He also(co)- organized various conference ad public debates about enclosures, commons and spatial justice, the most recent one being ‘Economy of Crisis Capitalism and Ecology of the Commons’.


'''2.''' 

"Tomislav Medak is a member of Multimedia Institute/MAMA (Zagreb, Croatia), where he's organizing theory and publishing activities. At the focus of his theoretical interest are constellations of contemporary political philosophy, media theory and aesthetics. He's a free software and free culture advocate, and the project lead of Creative Commons Croatia. He's aslo militant of the urban activist initiative "Right to the City". When he's not doing any of the above, he's busy working with his theatre collective BADco.

Tomislav Medak is a member of Multimedia Institute/MAMA (http://www.mi2.hr) - Zagreb, Croatia-based NGO dealing with social approaches to technology, digital culture and social theory -, where he's in charge of theory and publishing programme. At the focus of his theoretical interest are constellations of contemporary political philosophy, media theory and aesthetics. His practical pursuit is the expansion of the public domain. He's a free software and free culture advocate, and the project lead of Creative Commons Croatia (http://hr.creativecommons.org). 


'''Work around commons:'''

Recently he has (co-)organized conferences and public debates relating to issues of the enclosures, commons and spatial justice. Most recently "Economy of Crisis Capitalism and Ecology of the Commons" (http://commons.mi2.hr/, 2012), "A Squandered Future?: Austerity Policies, Public Sector Marketization and Privatization of Public Goods" (http://www.slobodnifilozofski.com/2012/01/tribina-potrosena-buducnost-politike.html, 2012),  "Open Institutions: Institutional Imagination and Cultural Public Sphere" (http://zagreb.openinstitutions.net/, 2011), "The Neoliberal Frontline: Urban Struggles in Post-Socialist Cities" (http://www.tni.org/archives/acts_zagrebconf, 2008).

Previously, together with Marcell Mars, he coedited a reader on socio-cultural impact of free software "GNUSpectre" and coauthored free culture, technology and science festival "Freedom to Creativity!" (http://www.slobodastvaralastvu.org/). Together they have also created a conceptual exhibition on the history of hacking System.hack()".

As activist he has recently participated in organizing activities of the Right to the City Zagreb (http://www.pravonagrad.org) and Croatian protests against the ACTA agreement (http://paratekst.wordpress.org).


'''Artistic work:'''

Also he's a member of Zagreb-based theatre collective BADco (http://www.badco.hr). He helped author, in varying capacities as director, dramaturge and performer a number of performances and artworks: “Didrot's Nephew”, “Ribcage”, “Deleted Messages”, “1 poor and one 0”, "The League of Time", "Responsiblity for Things Seen", "Black and Forth", "Is There Life on Stage?". The work of BADco. has been presented internationally, recently a.o. venues at Volksbühne and the Venice Biennale.

[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Croatia]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]