
=Description=

"40 community tool libraries already exist throughout the United States, from Philadelphia to Seattle and south to Oakland and New Orleans. Each has its own unique flavor but most operate roughly the same way by accepting tool donations from the community and then lending those tools out for free—or nearly free—to anyone capable of presenting an ID and signing a waiver. Through that basic setup, some tool libraries have been happily participating in the sharing economy for over 20 years."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/how-to-start-a-tool-library)


=Status=

"Partly as a result of the incubators, there are currently six other tool library projects underway just in Seattle alone and a handful more starting up throughout our region. The starter kit—including liability and membership forms, tool use policies, sample work plans, budgets, letters of support, and fiscal sponsor agreements—will hopefully allow all of these organizations to overcome the burdens and worries of moving their concepts on to the next stage.

Considering all the obvious benefits that tool libraries offer, from encouraging neighborhood development to serving as a great foundation for the sharing economy, it’s rather a shame that there isn’t one in every neighborhood. Through the efforts of a growing tool library community, though, that situation seems to be changing rapidly. With all the resources now out there to tap into, and all the established tool libraries calming the fears, it’s quite possible that everyone will soon have a tool library just down the street. If that doesn’t automatically happen where you live, perhaps all these resources will at least give you the confidence to start building one of your own…and then share what you learn."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/how-to-start-a-tool-library)



=Example=


==Portland==

"The city's first nonprofit tool library, founded in 2004 in North Portland, is up to 2,300 members. Its second, in Northeast, has already drawn 800 members in 16 months and just expanded to a far bigger space. A third, in southeast Portland, is scheduled to open this spring, which would make Portland the only U.S. city with a trio.

The volunteer-run tool libraries offer low-cost home and garden lessons as well as tools. They help people save money and connect to their community.

And they promote recycling and reuse.

About 900 of the more than 1,100 tools at the Northeast Portland Tool Library were donated, helping give the library a hardware store's worth of inventory.

"The whole idea is everybody doesn't have to own a power drill or a post-hole digger," says Tom Thompson, a 58-year-old remodeling contractor who serves as volunteer toolmaster for the northeast tool library. "We wanted to be able to help out the environment and help out people, especially with the economy the way it is today."

The first modern tool libraries started in the 1970s, with libraries in Berkeley, Calif., and Columbus, Ohio, among the pioneers. Informal Web lists put the latest U.S. total at about 25, including five in California and one in Seattle."
(http://www.oregonlive.com/environment/index.ssf/2010/01/portland_ratchets_up_volunteer.html)


==Others==

Directory of 40 places at http://localtools.org/find/

* West Philly, http://westphillytools.org/
* West Seattle, http://wstoollibrary.org/




=More Information=

* National Tool Library Google Group, http://groups.google.com/group/toollibrary?lnk=srg
* [http://sharestarter.org/ Share Starter], which has now hosted a handful of tool library incubator sessions as well as developed a [http://sharestarter.org/tools/ free starter kit].
* How to start a tool library, http://www.shareable.net/blog/how-to-start-a-tool-library


[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Sharing]]