
'''= "These digital platforms can help local government consult, collaborate with, and empower citizens in community decision-making".'''


=Directory=

Via [http://www.communitymatters.org/blog/let%E2%80%99s-get-digital-50-tools-online-public-engagement] :


#coUrbanize: List project information for development proposals and gather online feedback.
#Cityzen: Gathers feedback by integrating polling and social media sites.
#Community Remarks: Map-based tool for facilitating dialogue and collecting feedback.
#Crowdbrite: Organizes comments for online brainstorming sessions and workshops.
#EngagementHQ: Provides information and gathers feedback for decision-making.
#MetroQuest: Incorporates scenario planning and visualizations for informing the public and collecting feedback.
#SeeClickFix: For reporting and responding to neighborhood issues.
#Neighborland: Forum that encourages community discussion and action at the neighborhood level.
#PublicStuff: Communication system for reporting and resolving community concerns.
#MindMixer: Ideation platform for community projects. 
#NextDoor: Private social network and forum for neighborhoods.
#Adopt-a-Hydrant: Allows citizens to help maintain public infrastructure. 
#CivicInsight: Platform for sharing progress on development of blighted properties.
#i-Neighbors: Free community website and discussion forum. 
#Recovers: Engages the public in disaster preparedness and recovery.
#EngagingPlans: Information sharing and feedback forum for productive participation.
#Street Bump: Crowdsourcing application to improve public streets.
#neighbor.ly: Crowdfunding platform to promote local investment in improvement projects.
#TellUs Toolkit: Map-based tools for engagement and decision-making.
#Budget Simulator: Tool for educating about budget priorities and collecting feedback.
#CrowdHall: Interactive town halls meetings.
#Citizinvestor: Crowdfunding and civic engagement platform for local government projects.
#Open Town Hall: Online public comment forum for government.
#Shareabouts: Flexible tool for gathering public input on a map.
#Poll Everywhere: Collects audience responses in real time, live, or via the web.
#Tidepools: Collaborative mobile mapping platform for gathering and sharing hyperlocal information.
#Community PlanIt: Online game that makes planning playful, while collecting insight on community decisions. 
#Open311: System for connecting citizens to government for reporting non-emergency issues.
#DialogueApp: Promotes dialogue to solve policy challenges with citizen input.
#Loomio: Online tool for collaborative decision-making.
#PlaceSpeak: Location-based community consultation platform.
#Citizen Budget: Involves residents in budgeting.
#e-Deliberation: Collaborative platform for large group decision-making.
#CrowdGauge: Open-source framework for building educational online games related to public priority setting.
#Citizen Space: Manage, publicize, and archive all public feedback activity.
#Zilino: Host deliberative online forums and facilitated participatory meetings.
#WeJit: Collaborative online decision-making, brainstorming, debating, prioritizing, and more. 
#Ethelo Decisions: Framework for engagement, conflict resolution, and collective determination.
#Community Almanac: Contribute and collect stories about your community. 
#GitHub: Connecting government employees with the public to collaborate on code, data, and policy.
#VividMaps: Engages citizens to map and promote local community assets.
#OSCity: Search, visualize, and combine data to gain insight on spatial planning. (EU only.)
#Civic Commons: Promoting conversations and connections that have the power to become informed, productive, collective #civic action.
#Crowdmap: Collaborative mapping.
#Codigital: Get input on important issues.
#All Our Ideas: Collect and prioritize ideas through a democratic, transparent, and efficient process.
#Neighborhow: Create useful how-to guides for the community.
#OurCommonPlace: A community web-platform for connecting neighbors.
#Front Porch Forum: A free community forum, helping neighbors connect.
#PrioritySpend: Prioritization tool based on valuing ideas and possible actions.



[[Category:Participation]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Democracy]]