
'''* Report. NATURAL CAPITAL AT RISK: THE TOP 100 EXTERNALITIES OF BUSINESS. Trucost, 2013'''

URL = http://www.naturalcapitalcoalition.org/js/plugins/filemanager/files/TEEB_Final_Report_v5.pdf


=Description=

"Trucost has undertaken this study on behalf of the TEEB for Business 
Coalition.
 
Findings of this report build on TEEB’s The Economics of 
Ecosystems and Biodiversity in Business and Enterprise and the World 
Business Council for Sustainable Development’s Guide to Corporate 
Ecosystem Valuation by estimating in monetary terms the financial risk from 
unpriced natural capital inputs to production, across business sectors at a 
regional level. By using an environmentally extended input-output model 
(EEIO) (see Appendix 2), it also estimates, at a high level, how these may flow 
through global supply chains to producers of consumer goods. It 
demonstrates that some business activities do not generate sufficient profit 
to cover their natural resource use and pollution costs. However, businesses 
and investors can take account of natural capital costs in decision making to 
manage risk and gain competitive advantage.

Natural capital assets fall into two categories: those which are non-renewable 
and traded, such as fossil fuel and mineral “commodities”; and those which 
provide finite renewable goods and services for which no price typically 
exists, such as clean air, groundwater and biodiversity. During the past decade 
commodity prices erased a century-long decline in real terms, and risks are 
growing from over-exploitation of increasingly scarce, unpriced natural 
capital. Depletion of ecosystem goods and services, such as damages from 
climate change or land conversion, generates economic, social and 
environmental externalities. Growing business demand for natural capital, and 
falling supply due to environmental degradation and events such as drought, 
are contributing to natural resource constraints, including water scarcity.
 
Government policies to address the challenge include environmental 
regulations and market-based instruments which may internalize natural 
capital costs and lower the profitability of polluting activities. In the absence 
of regulation, these costs usually remain externalized unless an event such as 
drought causes rapid internalization along supply-chains through commodity 
price volatility (although the costs arising from a drought will not necessarily 
be in proportion to the externality from any irrigation). Companies in many 
sectors are exposed to natural capital risks through their supply chains, 
especially where margins and pricing power are low. For example, Trucost’s 
analysis found that the profits of apparel retailers were impacted by up to 
50% through cotton price volatility in recent years.
 
Economy-wide, these risks 
are sufficiently large that the World Economic Forum cites ‘water supply 
crises’ and ‘failure of climate change adaptation’ along with several other 
environmental impacts among the most material risks facing the 
global economy.

This study monetizes the value of unpriced natural capital consumed by 
primary production (agriculture, forestry, fisheries, mining, oil and gas 
exploration, utilities) and some primary processing (cement, steel, pulp and 
paper, petrochemicals) (see Appendix 3) in the global economy through 
standard operating practices, excluding catastrophic events. For each sector in 
each region (region-sector), it estimates the natural capital cost broken down 
by six environmental key performance indicators (EKPIs), and a ranking of the 
top 100 costs is developed from this. It also estimates the 20 region-sectors 
with the highest combined impacts across all EKPIs to provide a platform 
for companies to begin to assess exposure to unpriced natural capital, both 
directly and through supply chains. In doing so it allows investors to consider 
how their assets may be exposed. It also highlights sector-level variation in 
regional exposure to impacts to identify opportunities to enhance competitive 
advantage. It does not attempt to assess the rate at which these costs may 
be internalized, and whether sectors are able to adapt, but attempts to give a 
high-level view of where natural capital risk lies, and what this could mean for 
business profitability in a more sustainable regulatory environment."
(http://www.naturalcapitalcoalition.org/js/plugins/filemanager/files/TEEB_Final_Report_v5.pdf)


[[Category:P2P Market Approaches]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Articles]]