(on request by the editor, this item is still under embargo until sep 30, 2010)

'''* Article: How Do We Organize Information Fire Hoses?: A Tour of the Rationale, Structure and Maintenance of the Peer to Peer Foundation Wiki. The Cook Report on Internet Protocol. Volume XIX, No. 7, October 2010'''

URL = http://www.cookreport.com/index.php?option=com_docman&task=cat_view&gid=37&Itemid=61 (archive of back issues)


=Excerpts=


==Editorʼs Introduction==

As the global disruption from the crash of 2008 continues with unemployment in the United States
at levels not seen since the Great Depression, and with the increasing likelihood that policy in
Washington in the near future will do nothing about it, the question of understanding and facilitating
the transition to the post-crash economy becomes more relevant. It seems ever more likely
that things will become more tribal and more local. With globalism’s approach to the economy in
general having made traditional jobs harder to get, we live in a world of hollowed out nation states,
that can be hopefully transformed into resilient communities. In such a world, one must wonder
where new and unexpected jobs will come from. It is clear that there are some as yet some unrecognized
possibilities out there.

Such possibilities were called to mind via an August 9 link on John Robb's blog Global Guerrillas: --
“Foldit Game. Using online games to solve extremely complex scientific problems. “These
links demonstrate another proof of concept that massively multiplayer online games can do real
world work. For example, you can have the objective to build a company or alternative economy
as an MMOG that can sop up the world's cognitive surplus and deliver substantial income to the
players.”

“An interesting question: Do we really have a cognitive surplus in the world? We certainly
have a bunch of highly educated people who no longer have employment and we have a fire hose
of information from the Internet waiting to be organized.”

It is in this context that I have decided to examine the process used by Michel Bauwens in the
creation of his Peer-to-Peer Foundation wiki. In the remainder of this October issue, I will explain
how Michel works because I believe that there may be an employment role for Internet cyberiansa
role that is not yet really understood. Consequently, this article will examine the process that
Michel uses in the creation of his wiki, a process that I believe can be replicated to create dozens,
or maybe hundreds, or maybe even thousands of other wikis to bring together rapidly emerging
knowledge in a way that is useful to the people involved.

There are really two stories in what Michel Bauwens is doing. The first is the grand intellectual
synthesis involved in his capture of what he calls the emerging p2p political and social economy.
That story in itself is covered in the July 2010 issue and is highly significant.

But as I looked further into his wiki, encyclopedia, “cathedral” or whatever you choose to call it, I
began to wonder how the edifice was put together. When I first ran into Michel in the winter of
2006-2007, what he had created seemed like a large web site. Now, when I took a really close look
three years later, there was this huge edifice. Rather like an iceberg. The part above water is large
but what extends beneath is simply immense.

As I followed his twitter updates I could see what he meant when he said that he was continually
building, polishing, expanding the P2P Wiki. The more I browsed, the more I wondered how he obtained
and structured this huge mass of material. It was only when I was on the home page and
looked at his del.icio.us links that I realized what, together with his daily blog readings, was going
on.

He was using an entire suite of tools in new and unique ways where the product of the
suite was greater than the sum of its parts. I knew the tools with the exception of del.icio.us .
I knew of del.icio.us but had never played with it. When I saw what he was doing with del.icio.us ,
I realized that it was being treated in a way similar to a library card catalogue. His own reading
was indexed and tagged so that it could be gathered as mini database inside the wiki, and the
del.icio.us bookmarks of those in his network are used as an automatically updated current awareness
index.


Thus, he does his own scanning but is virtually assisted by 150 or so other people whose del.icio.us
bookmarks he scans and uses as he sees fit. I asked Michel: “I think what i am seeing is that you
have developed an intriguing way of interweaving all of these tools. The interweaving is
what does not seem to be widely grasped. Most folk don't know it’s possible. The fact
that you can blend them all together to make something out of the combination that is
more powerful than any of the parts is, I think, noteworthy."


==Executive Summary==

"We explore how Michel Bauwens has used a set of tools in order to create his rather extraordinary
wiki. He has done this by means of unusual and creative use of del.icio.us tagging and bookmarks -
using media wiki as software, by means of update announcements on Twitter, a mailing list that
ties his community together and a daily blog that offers substantive pointers and excerpts to what
is community is discovering as well as a Ning social networking site for community wide announcements.

In doing the first interview with Michel we developed a hypothesis with which he
agreed: namely that he is using tools available to anyone but using them in a rather unique way to
develop a methodology for organizing information on the Internet a new form of digital library.
We explored these ideas in follow-up interviews with Michel and have used them in this issue to
present what could be seen as a user manual for the wiki or a guidebook to the way in which it has
been established and structured. We show the way in which the Wikimedia software allows the
creation of subject categories that become a series of very useful databases for collecting and organizing
specified related areas of interest. Reading about Michel’s approach should give insights
into how people can begin to organize online communities in cooperative collaborative information
sharing and problem solving.

After reading this you will understand the component parts and sections, and the basic structure of
the peer-to-peer foundation wiki as well as how to login and begin to enter on material. But more
important overall is the idea that it is worthwhile to explain so that broader range of other
people can examine and test these ideas for themselves. The question to be pondered is
the extent to which it may make sense to apply Michel's methodology to one’s own fields of interest.
But there is broader question as well. Is this is an emerging way of organizing the fire hose of
information that comes from the Internet? The ultimate issue of course is how can people who organize
his material for a community and be compensated for doing so? It seems that with the increase
of knowledge there is a broad need for this activity and certainly with the global downturn
there is more and more of what Clay Shirky has called the ‘cognitive surplus” of people with excellent
qualifications to undertake this kind of activity.
We conclude with a discussion with Michel where he explains how in the 80s and 90s he got in to
this kind of information management first with the United States Information Agency and later in
the early 90s with a Special Library for British Petroleum. In the mid 90s he became involved in his
own start ups and worked briefly for Belgacom eventually leaving there and going to Chang Mai
Thailand. After a two-year sabbatical he founded the Peer-to-Peer Foundation community."



=More Information=

#[[Gordon Cook begin_of_the_skype_highlighting     end_of_the_skype_highlighting begin_of_the_skype_highlighting     end_of_the_skype_highlighting begin_of_the_skype_highlighting     end_of_the_skype_highlighting Interviews Michel Bauwens]]
#[[Examination of Michel Bauwens' P2P Foundation]]
#Back Issues: http://www.cookreport.com/index.php?option=com_docman&task=cat_view&gid=37&Itemid=61
#Cook's Collaborative Edge Blog http://gordoncook.net/wp/