
'''* Chapter/ article: Networks and Commons: Bureaucracy, Collegiality and Organizational Morphogenesis in the Struggles to Shape Collective Responsibility in New Sharing Institutions. By Emmanuel Lazega.''' Chapter 10 of the book: Morphogenesis and Human Flourishing, Social Morphogenesis, ed. by Margaret Archer. Springer, 2017

URL = https://www.springer.com/la/book/9783319494685

=Description=

Towards New Commons in a Bureaucratized Society:

"What kind of combination of this bureaucracy -the default organizational form- and forms of collegiality emerging with new commons can we expect? What is the nature of the interactions between bureaucracy and collegiality when solving particular problems of collective action and collective responsibility. How do these organizational forms mix and interact?"


=Excerpt=

Emmanuel Lazega:

"The bottom-up challenges to the legitimacy of top-down collective responsibility
imposed by this bureaucratic parametrization to shape the institutionalization of
the new commons will take the form of morphogenetic struggles to control this
digitalization. Since there may not be any optimal stabilization of this struggle,
society may also become a morphognenic system with an ongoing creation of
new models. Digital parametrization of the new commons is part of contemporary
morphogenetic institutional changes. This parametrization started long ago with
widespread and gamified intrusiveness of platforms providing network profiles
into individual privacy,7 as well as the capacity offered to citizens to all become
creators of online collectives. This digitalization may also undermine bottom-up
institutional entrepreneurship. Indeed, in many online network services provided
globally, individuals today can look at their list of contacts but not at the structure
of their own network profile, even less at the profiles of their friends, and cannot
reconstitute “communities” and organized social movements that are created by the
hypergraph and concatenation of these profiles. They lack the capacity to zoom
in and out of social networks that are, at any one point in time, the carriers of
organized collegial action. Only ownership and control of the platform provide that
capacity today, without any real checks on this new power.

Social digitalization as bureaucratic control of future new collegial commons is
carried out as parametrization of the organization of collegial local communities and
sharing networks. Such new commons may not be purely local but locality matters,
even as geolocal grounding for these platforms. It makes it easier for ordinary
citizens to resist when bureaucrats, party leaders, creditors, inspectors, etc. show
up. The generic commons are for the neighbours’ association, people sharing the
same actual physical land resources. Locality creates a centre of gravity for them
and for the sharing of resources or space that helps with their sustainability.8 This
social digitalization is based on monitoring, accounting for and making sense of
exchanges, but also on shaping relational infrastructures (providing such actors with
more centrality, such niches with more resources).

The morphogenetic process of institutionalization of new kinds of commons will
use digital platforms and as such it may be a silent, invisible process of parametrization
of these commons with bureaucratic algorithms as much as (if not much more than) an open political process of democratic (representative or participative) rulemaking. Social digitalization can be a new way of subjecting, homogenizing and taxing the diverse commons unobtrusively. As in the duality of collegiality, it may increase the rate of creation of new commons, but also end up subordinating them to bureaucratic control. The tools for creating the commons could also be the sources
for their streamlining. Social digitalization will increase the rythm of creation of
commons that existed before the emergence of these platforms. Research needs to
flesh out the set of choices that these digital platforms make for citizens when they
use them to build their new commons –i.e. choices that they are not aware of and that
prestructure the unexpected ways in which these commons will be used to enforce
collective responsibility.

If the meeting between bureaucracy and collegiality is now shaped by social
digitalization bureaucratizing the commons in an organizational and morphogenetic
process, platforms will organize civil society by parametrizing collective responsibility,
within or without the framework of the/civil law. The social order that
platforms thus develop will rest in part on online virtual social networks of
interactions and organize the live offline relations that coordinate/emerge through
these platforms. Since it creates the online context for live offline relations and
exchanges, the multilevel architecture and the ownership and control of the platform
itself deserve close sociological inquiry. This is even highly compatible with mass
bureaucratized markets plus the military pathway to the bleak prospects outlined
above. Such a digital structure can take over at the macro level and manage millions
of collegial pockets that will try to protect themselves from both the environmental
crunch and the violence of the military bureaucracy.

Creating institutions for the new local commons will be a dynamic multilevel
process (Lazega 2013, 2014b) mobilizing networks, relational infrastructures, social
processes and many other ingredients characterizing collegiality, including its
vicious cycles (of patronage, clientelism and corruption). But the emergence of this
institution will be parametrized by bureaucracy just as the bishop sets limits and
conditions to his priests’ participation and cooptation. It sheds light on the widening
‘democratic deficit’ that characterizes modern societies. This institutionalization
raises the more general issue of the relationship between the democratic process
and lobbying in pluto-technocratic bureaucracies. Tracing this regulatory process
leads back to the determinants and proliferation of ‘anormative regulation’ (Archer
2016 volume; Al-Amoudi 2014; Al-Amoudi and Latsis 2014).

Behind any commons, there are communities mixing formal and informal rules,
contractual and non market relationships (Coriat 2015) thanks to the relational
dimension of social processes. In a world in which profit extraction and capital
accumulation are violent, bureaucratization of the local commons can be seen
as both a way to prevent local communities from closing off in oppositional
solidarities, privatizing their resources in their collegial pockets; and a way to
spread new digital and bureaucratic controls that will monitor, manage, tax and
sanction, using collective responsibility, in potentially predatory ways these local
communities. If elites with private armies prefer their current closure and the
military pathway, then mechanisms must be put in place to challenge them and
force them to equate survival and the interests of the many, not only the collegial
and oligarchic few. Despots, even enlightened ones who are helped by big data
platforms invading people’s privacy, cannot achieve on their own the protection
of a heritage that can be transmitted and without which the next generations will
not have a decent life. Hopefully, democracy can be saved by new New Deals and
new constitutions. It can be trumped by plutocracy and captured institutions. It can
be destroyed by fascism; but it can be also weakened by parametrization of the new
digitalized commons, i.e. transformed into an ersatz of democracy, using collegiality
as a tool for management, just like the Catholic church, but with likely more brutal
and forced forms of collective responsibility.

If morphogenetic processes only may be able to bring about the changes that are
needed for collective survival, then mechanisms should be put in place that, based on
better understanding of new forms of co-constitution of bureaucracy and collegiality,
challenge closed elites and force them to equate survival and the interests of the
many, not only the collegial and oligarchic few. By using for example dynamics
of multilevel networks to identify forms of virtuous and vicious organizational
morphogenesis, sociologists may increase their chances of making their discipline
relevant again for institutional change and innovation. Indeed knowledge of organizational
morphogenesis may help actors define the collegial social discipline
that they find legitimate for their commons so as not to exhaust the social capital
that produces an alternative to the bureaucratic and military path, and eventually
understand how to create a protected heritage to transfer to future generations. A
neostructural approach is a useful part of the intellectual adventure of contemporary
social sciences if it helps identify in morphogenetic mechanisms what must change
in the transition for the earth to be livable by future generations."
(https://www.springer.com/la/book/9783319494685)

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Articles]]