
'''* Article: The New Concert of Powers. How to Prevent Catastrophe and Promote Stability in a  Multipolar World.  Richard N. Haass and Charles A. Kupchan.  Council on Foreign Relations / Foreign Affairs, 2021;  pp. 80-103'''

URL =

Source: Book: ANCHORING THE WORLD INTERNATIONAL ORDER IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY. Essays from the Lloyd George Study Group on World Order. Edited by Charles A. Kupchan and Leslie Vinjamuri. Foreign Affairs, 


=Description-

"In the seventh and final essay, Richard Haass and Charles Kupchan propose the establishment of a global concert of major powers, arguing that such a steering group represents the most realistic and pragmatic means of taming the twenty-first century’s inescapable ideological and geopolitical rivalry. Concerts exhibit political inclusivity; they bring to the table powerful states that wield geopolitical influence, regardless of their regime type. Concerts also exhibit procedural informality; they eschew binding agreements and public diplomacy in favor of private deliberation and consensus building. A global concert would be consultative, not decisional, readying decisions that would be taken and implemented by existing institutions. It would thus backstop, not supplant, the current international architecture by sustaining a strategic dialogue that does not now exist. A global concert would aim to build consensus around a core set of understandings to guide statecraft, manage crises, promote stability, and discuss how best to adapt international norms and institutions to a changing world."

[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Security]]