

=Introductory Citation=

'''Scale up from one: Regular people and small manufacturing companies that lack investment capital will be able to set up low investment, “start small and scale up as it goes” businesses. Thanks to the low-cost Internet virtual storefronts, and the low cost of small-scale manufacturing for prototypes and custom goods, new companies can get started on a shoestring budget, yet sell their wares or services to niche, global marketplaces.'''

- Hod Lipson & Melba Kurman [http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf]


=Discussion=

Hod Lipson & Melba Kurman:

"Personal manufacturing technologies are the ideal foundation for an emerging
ecosystem of small manufacturers that sell custom-made machine parts to the
government or other clients via online procurement catalogs. The long tail of
machine parts is already taking shape in all places, an online supplies catalog
managed by the Department of Defense (DoD).

...

the Department of Defense developed Emall, an
online repository of approved vendors that sell batteries, aircraft covers, office
supplies and packing material to government agencies. Over the years, DoD’s Emall
has grown from a research and development project to a billion-dollar government
enterprise. Today, Emall’s product catalog includes over 70 million items from 1,900
individual suppliers.

Imagine a future online long tail government marketplace, similar to Emall combined
with 100Kgarages.com, where government procurement officers and other customers
would not just procure supplies, but browse electronic blueprints in search of a
desired custom part or object.

...

a long tail manufacturing marketplace
taking place in the commercial sector is
exemplified by a company called eMachineShop
which provides easy, convenient and low-cost
fabrication services of custom parts via its web
site. eMachineShop has its own, proprietary
design software that customers use to design the
part they need so they can submit the blueprint
design to [[eMachineShop]] for an instant price
quote. Once their design is completed,
customers can play with alternative options that
affect the cost of manufacturing their desired
design by getting a smorgasbord of cost
estimates based on using different available
materials, and adding or subtracting product features."
(http://web.mae.cornell.edu/lipson/FactoryAtHome.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Personal Manufacturing]]
* [[Long Tail of Manufacturing]]