
'''Report: Towards a New Literacy of Cooperation with Business.Howard Rheingold et al. (with support from Sam Rose). Institute for the Future, 2007''' (67 pages)

URL = http://www.iftf.org/system/files/deliverables/SR-851A_New_Literacy_Cooperation.pdf

=Description=

From the introduction:

"Traditional business strategy is organized around competition: win–lose models fueled by SWOT analyses, market share frameworks, hard measurement, and protection of quantifiable private assets. In mature industries, cooperation is confined to supporting industry associations, which focus on issues of common concerns such as tax rules, and professional bodies, which set common technical standards. [http://www.iftf.org/node/776]

In the last two decades, however, we’ve seen a variety
of challenges to business models that stress competition
over customers, resources, and ideas.

• Companies in emerging high-tech industries
have learned that working with competitors
can build markets and help avoid costly
standards wars.

• The open source movement has shown that
world-class software can be built without
corporate oversight or market incentives.

• Google and Amazon have built fortunes by
drawing on—and even improving—the
Internet.

• Outsourcing has turned competitors into common
customers of design firms and contract
manufacturers.

The value of competition-oriented strategies will further
decline as emerging technologies and new media
diffuse from high-tech into traditional industries and
as global industries become more fluid and flexible.
Connective and pervasive technologies are enabling
new forms of human and machine interactions and
relationships; they will present business institutions
with a host of new possibilities for organizing people,
processes, relationships and knowledge. These
forces will accelerate a shift in business strategy
from solving concrete business problems to managing
complex business dilemmas, which in turn will
require a broader set of strategic tools and concepts
than are provided by competitive models."


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category: Books]]

[[Category:Articles]]