
Book by [[Roberto Verzola]] and essay by [[Yochai Benkler]]


=The Book=


'''* Book. Roberto Verzola.  [[Towards a Political Economy of Information]]: Studies on the Information Economy, Foundation for Nationalist Studies, 2004'''


URL = http://rverzola.files.wordpress.com/2008/01/infoeconomy-verzola.pdf

The book analyzes the social impacts of new information and communications technologies (ICT).


=Contents=


The following is the '''table of contents''' of the book:


'''Part I. Information and Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)'''


1. The miracle of the loaves

2. A new offensive against the Third World

3. U.S. piracy in the 19th century

4. The “piracy" of intellectuals

5. GATT: Free Trade or Monopoly Growth?

6. IPR: a clash of value-systems

7. Towards a political economy of information


'''Part II. ICTs and the Internet'''


8. Expanding market for information economies

9. A hierarchy of access

10. ICT: job creator or destroyer?

11. A poor learning environment

12. An interactive idiot box

13. Private space controlled by rentiers

14. Perverse subsidies

15. Internet cafes: connectivity for the masses?


'''Part III. Genetic Information And Genetic Engineering'''


16. Turning farmers into “pirates"

17. Pirating genetic resources

18. Beware of modern vampires

19. Biosafety and genetic contamination


'''Part IV. Monopolistic Information Economies'''


20. Information monopolies and the WTO

21. Globalization: the third wave

22. Cyberlords: rentier class of the information sector

23. Testing the political strength of a cyberlord

24. Globalization: poor design?

25. What could be more important than efficiency?


'''Part V. Alternatives: A Non-Monopolistic Information Sector'''


26. A well-kept IT secret

27. IT or AT?

28. Community rights over biological material: property or moral rights?

29. Low-cost strategies for ICT deployment in developing countries

30. Greening the information sector

31. Alternatives to globalization


==Excerpts==

* Chapter 23: [[Reliability vs Efficiency‎]]

* [[Cyberlords as a Rentier Class]]



==The Essay==

* Article: “Freedom in the Commons, Towards a Political Economy of Information,” Duke Law Journal 52 (2003):1249



[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Culture]]