'''Essay: Paul S. Adler and Charles Heckscher. Towards Collaborative Community / (Book: The Corporation as a Collaborative Community)'''

URL = http://www-bcf.usc.edu/~padler/research/01-Heckscher-chap01%20copy-1.pdf


=Description=

This is an absolutely remarkable essay that charts the history of community within the capitalist form, from the earliest community oriented paternalism (the '[[Gemeinschaft]]' model described by Tonnies), to the bureaucratic ('[[Gesellschaft]]') model described by Weber and Durkheim, culminating in the emergence of [[collaborative Community]], existing in tension and contradiction within the hierarchical and market environment of for-profit companies.

=Excerpts=

==The zig zag path of development==

Paul S. Adler and Charles Heckscher:

(pp. 59-60)

Researchers who have studied the evolution of the popularity of various
management techniques in management journals have consistently identified
periods that alternate between a focus on employee commitment
and a focus on managerial control:

# Commitment, 1870s–1890s: welfare work.
# Control, 1890s–1910s: scientific management.
# Commitment, 1920–1940s: human relations.
# Control, 1940s–1960s: systems rationalization.
# Commitment, 1970–1990: employee involvement.
# Control, 1990– : business process re-engineering and outsourcing.

The surface pattern is one of alternation; but closer examination reveals an
underlying progression. Starting from a situation of ‘competitive capitalism’
and ‘simple control,’96 the sequence of commitment approaches aims
successively deeper; the sequence of control approaches aims successively
broader; and the latter have become increasingly hospitable to the former.
First, relative to the commitment approaches, there is a clear shift from
the earlier reliance on paternalism, to relatively impersonal, bureaucratic
norms of procedural justice, to an emphasis on empowerment and mutual
commitment, targeting progressively deeper forms of subjective involvement
of the individual worker. And this sequence engaged progressively
deeper layers of work organization: welfare work did not seek to modify
the core of work organization; human relations addressed mainly supervision;
employee involvement brought concern for commitment into the
heart of work organization.

Second, the sequence of control innovations—from scientific management
to systems rationalism to re-engineering—aims at successively
broader spans of the value chain. Scientific management focuses on tasks
and the flow of materials in the workshop. Systems rationalism aimed at a
more comprehensive optimization of production and distribution activities.
Re-engineering and outsourcing aimed at the rationalization of flows
across as well as within firms.

Third, the relation between the commitment and control approaches
seems to have changed: the control approaches seem to have become
increasingly hospitable to commitment. Within two or three years of
publishing a text popularizing a rather brutally coercive method of business
process re-engineering, both James Champy and Michael Hammer
published new volumes stressing the importance of the human factor and
the need for job redesigns that afford employees greater autonomy. The
undeniably autocratic character of much early re-engineering rhetoric and
its rapid ‘softening’ compares favorably with more unilateral and enduring
forms of domination expressed in post-war systems rationalism. It
compares even more favorably with the even more unilateral and rigid
rhetoric in turn-of-the-century scientific management: scientific management
only softened its relations with organized labor after nearly two
decades of confrontation.

The zigzag path of development in management technique appears to
trace a vector that corresponds well to Marx’s notion of ‘socialization’:
conscious control, and in particular in the form of collaborative community,
characterizes progressively broader spans of activity."

==Three Types of Community==

Paul S. Adler and Charles Heckscher:

Three organizing principles and three forms of community:

"Abstractly speaking, we can identify three primary principles of social
organization. Hierarchy uses authority to create and coordinate a horizontal
and vertical division of labor—a bureaucracy in Weber’s ideal-type
form. Market relies on the price mechanism to coordinate competing and
anonymous suppliers and buyers. Community relies on shared values and
norms.

Real collectivities embody variable mixes of these principles. 

Moreover, real collectivities may best be mapped using the principles as three orthogonal
dimensions rather than as three apexes of a two-dimensional triangle:

the fact that oneprinciple is a powerful factor shaping a particular collectivity
does not preclude one or both of the other principles fromalso being powerful
factors. However neither hierarchy nor market can actually function
without at least some underpinning of community. Neither can function
without a stable set of expectations shared by its members—that, for
example, contracts will be honored and doing one’s duties will be rewarded.
The form of community differs depending on its relation to the other
two principles of social organization. When the dominant principle of
social organization is hierarchy, community takes the form of
Gemeinschaft. When the dominant principle shifts to market, community
mutates from Gemeinschaft into Gesellschaft.We postulate that when community
itself becomes the dominant organizing principle, it will take a
form quite different from either Gemeinschaft or Gesellschaft.
Aspects of this new form of community can be discerned in the organization
of science and the professions. Today, we argue, this new form is
also emerging in the heart of the corporate realm. 


To summarize the
argument below, we can contrast the new form of community with the
two earlier ones on three fundamental dimensions:

1. Values: Community is first a set of value orientations shared (more or
less) by all members of a group. Everyone can assume that the others
will orient to those values and can therefore predict their actions and
responses. This forms the basis for trust among individuals and order
in social interaction. Collaborative community is distinctive in its
reliance on value-rationality—participants coordinate their activity
through their commitment to common, ultimate goals. Its highest
value is interdependent contribution, as distinct from loyalty or individual
integrity.

2. Organization: Community is also a social structure, specifying the
boundaries of reference groups, the appropriate forms of authority,
and the division of labor. Collaborative community is distinctive in
social structures that support interdependent process management
through formal and informal social structures.

3. Identify: Community cannot be effective as an organizing principle if
it is merely an external constraint on people or a socially sanctioned
set of values: it must become internalized in personalities and motivational
systems. Collaborative community is distinctive especially
in its reliance on interactive social character and interdependent selfconstruals:
rather than orienting to a single source of morality and
authority, the personality must reconcile multiple conflicting
identities and construct a sense of wholeness from competing attachments
and interactions."

===Gemeinschaft: traditional community===

"In its traditional ([[Gemeinschaft]]) form, community itself had a sacred quality.
As To¨nnies (1887) argued, Gemeinschaft had a hierarchical structure, in
which individuals and subunits are related in clear chains of subordination
to the superordinate leader whose authority derives from tradition
or charisma (per Weber). The core values are therefore those of loyalty
and deference.

In such a social structure, horizontal relations, such as the relations of
husband and wife, of doctor and patient, even of merchant and client, are
defined indirectly, in terms of status obligations and their ‘fit’ within the
larger system rather than through direct interaction or negotiation. In
effect, the proper relationship between two parties can be read directly
from their respective social roles. Challenges to status or violations of
obligations of deference are a deeply feared threat to order. Those who are honorable,
in other words, are trustworthy. A large system of sanctions, especially the
force of reputation in the community, centers on the performance of these
obligations.

This form of community is necessarily closed and particularistic, and
this closure is reflected in the nature of social identities. Identities under
Gemeinschaft typically trace a sharp differentiation between insiders and
outsiders. They are conformist, because conformity defines insider status.
They have hierarchy built in. Friendships and romantic relationships do
exist in traditional societies, but if they cross the boundaries of the status
system they are seen as grave threats to order.

Clearly such a form of community leaves little room for modern markets,
let alone systematic innovation. Under Gemeinschaft conditions,
these processes must be organized informally and in the interstices of
the system."


===[[Gesellschaft]]===

"The development of individualism was an upheaval that shook apart the
traditional order. It ‘took degree away,’ freeing people from the strictures
of status and therefore destroying the basis of trust in the status order. In
its place it put as the basis of trust the integrity of the individual; trust
became based on the consistency—generally the rational consistency—of
action. It led to the necessity of forming an independently coherent sense
of the self, distinct from social roles and institutions.

One core insight in both Weber and Durkheim is that the move to
individualism did not mean the elimination of the shared moral beliefs,
or even a relaxation of them. It involved rather the development of a new
content to the moral order. Both associated this change with Protestantism,
which created a moral imperative for individualism. Both stressed that
individualism in this sense was not a matter of the expression of an
essential ‘human nature,’ but quite the contrary, a socially determined
obligation which created heavy burdens on personality: an obligation to be
rational, self-interested, and consistent. It is in this sense that Gesellschaft
is not the negation of community but a form of it. The individualism in
Protestantism produced enormous pressures for the rationalization of
motivation and the acceptance of individual responsibility, and (as Durkheim
noted) the overload could easily lead to pathologies such as suicide.
On the one hand, this value system—of which Protestantism is only one
manifestation—supported and framed a market economy by freeing action
from the constraints of status and by requiring a consistent moral
person who can be responsible for promises and contracts.14 On the other
hand, the second insight we take from Durkheim and Weber, as well as
from Marx and other critics of modernity, is that this modern value is
inherently incomplete and contradictory because it disconnects values
from relationships. It breaks the communal ties of traditional society by
separating people from each other. It does not provide a framework for
lateral relationships of colleagueship and collaboration; indeed, it radically
separates individuals from each other and connects them (in the
Protestant version) directly to God or (in secular versions) to their own
private grounding of values. Values aside from individualism itself thus
become personal and private rather than ways of connecting to others.
Gesellschaft is thus inevitably associated with subjective alienation. The
communal dimension cannot be removed from human relationships
without a loss of sense of self and of meaning. It is not surprising, then,
that traditional community has continued to flourish in the interstices of
the larger, cooler set of Gesellschaft associations, nor surprising that the
two remain in tension. National and local communities draw people
together, but they also limit the scope of markets and are essentially
contradictory to the ethic of individualism.

The main solution in modern times has been to wall off community,
especially the family, in a ‘private’ sphere, where it can provide comfort
and solidarity without threatening the larger system.15 But this way of
dealing with social interaction—through the separation of public from
private and the reliance on informal links for community—is adequate
only when the density of interaction is low enough that people can
distinguish a large realm in which their actions do not affect others, and
when there is no need for intensive collaboration. As these conditions
change—as the intensity of interdependence and the needs for collaborative
effort increase—the separation breaks down. Then there is a need for a
socially ordered form of lateral, cooperative relationships. That change has
been visible both at the societal level and within the economic sphere."

===[[Collaborative Community]]===

"Neither the traditional nor modern forms of community are adequate for
groups that seek high levels of adaptiveness and complex interdependence.
In such situations trust is particularly important, because people
depend a great deal on others whose skills and expertise they cannot
check; autonomy and ‘rugged individualism’ give way to an increasingly
dense web of interdependence, and there is a growing need for stable
cooperative relations among highly differentiated actors. But in such
situations trust is also particularly difficult to achieve, because it can no
longer be based on tradition or on personal acquaintance and experience.
16 We believe that close scrutiny of contemporary firms reveals the
emergence of a new type of community that can square this circle.
Collaborative community forms when people work together to create
shared value. This increasingly characterizes societies in which the generation
of knowledge, often involving many specialists, has become central
to economic production. In this it is fundamentally unlike the two forms
we have described above: the traditional, where values are assumed to be
eternally embodied in the existing community, without the need for
shared ‘work’ to achieve them; and the modern, where values are removed
from the public realm and left to individuals, with community being
merely a place where individuals can pursue their own ends by participating
in a shared game. In a collaborative community, values are not individual beliefs, but the object of shared activity; they have to be discussed
and understood in similar ways by everyone. The basis of trust is the
degree to which members of the community believe that others have
contributions to make towards this shared creation.17 Adler’s chapter
invokes this idea under the label ‘object’: a collaborative community
emerges when a collectivity engages cooperative, interdependent activity
towards a common object.

The institutions of collaborative community are centered on defining the
core purposes and regulating interactions so that the right people can
contribute at the right time to advance the process of value-creation. In
a dynamic environment purpose must be distinguished from eternal ‘values,’
which are timeless statements of what the group is. Purpose is a
relatively pragmatic view of what the group is trying to achieve, given
the environmental challenges, in the foreseeable future. Agreement on
purpose or strategy is crucial: members of the community need to both
understand it in depth and be committed to its achievement. This means
that rather than being left to a small cadre of leaders, the purpose must
become a matter for widespread discussion. One can see this result clearly
in corporations: in the last few decades strategy has often moved from a
confidential preserve of top management to a key desideratum for all
employees.

When value and purpose are discussed, they may also be contested.
This is possibly the most difficult aspect of the difficult move to collaboration:
finding ways to debate core orientations while still working
together. Whereas in the Gesellschaft community working together is a
more or less accidental by-product of an interplay of individual interests—
coordination achieved by an invisible hand of the market or by a
nexus of employment contracts—in the collaborative community it involves
a deliberate and deliberated commitment to shared ends. But
deliberation at this level is hard to manage. Even in voluntary organizations,
it can easily slide into polarization or factionalism which shuts off
discussion.

Moreover, in the capitalist firm, there are deep structural challenges to
collaborative community. First, the power asymmetry between managers
and employees generates anxiety, deference, and resentment. Second, the
external goals of the firm are deeply contradictory—to produce useful
products and services (‘use-value’ in the parlance of classical political
economy) and to create monetary profit (‘exchange-value’). In capitalist
firms, collective purpose is therefore contradictory in its very nature.
Nevertheless, there has been a slow elaboration of mechanisms for

deliberation—forums in which employees are invited to ‘push back’
against their superiors, and where the contradictory nature of the firms’
goals is acknowledged and confronted."


=More Information=
* [[Charles Heckscher]]

[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Community]]
[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Governance]]