== Overview ==

This wiki entry compiles resources gathered by the organizers and participants of [https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/towards-fair-sharing-economy-role-place-cooperative-platforms/2016/11/28 Towards a fair sharing economy: The role and place of cooperative platforms] a event held in early December 2016 in Brussels. It will be updated with contributions from participants and serve as a repository of useful materials and information.

It is the intention of the organisers and participants to coalesce into a more defined collective. As such, the information here may be repurposed in the future for a simple website, or a more thorough directory.

== Events and Conferences ==

This is an ongoing list of events 

* [https://2017.open.coop/ Open2017], London conference, 16-17 February, Platform Co-ops.
* The assemblees des communs have an open agenda, Maia in cc would know how this works I think 
* Febecoop [http://febecoop.be/cases/conferentie-platformcoops-brussel/ "How to Coop the Internet Economy"] 9 March 2017
* Barcelona : Next May there will be a second [[Procomuns]] forum, and I hope to see many of you there. 
* Congrès international de l’ Alliance Coopérative internationale, Octobre, Kuala Lumpur
* ILO, June
* The 16th Biennal conference of the International Association of the Commons “[http://www.iasc2017.org/ Practicing the commons]” 10-14 July, Utrecht, the Netherlands
* [https://sase.org/event/2017-lyon/ SASE, Lyon], June 29th - July 1st, Benjamin  Coriat is preparing a panel. [http://yuri.biondi.free.fr/downloads/SASENetworkP_Call2017.pdf. Sase call for contributions]
 
== Partner Organizations ==

=== The Platform Cooperativism Consortium ===

"Trebor Scholz from New York has been in touch about the [[Platform Cooperativism Consortium]]. He was asking about any plans for a write up of the Brussels conference. Here is your account information for the PCC webpage (super-easy technical instructions below) Elaborate on how your organization will concretely contribute to the projects of the Platform Cooperativism Consortium. (You can find a list of these goals in the PCC working document.)"

== Documentation and suggested reading ==

=== Michel Bauwens ===

* Article: From the Communism of Capital to Capital for the Commons: Towards an Open Co-operativism. By Michel Bauwens, Vasilis Kostakis. Triple C, Vol 12, No 1 (2014) [http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/561]. [http://commonsstrategies.org/from-the-communism-of-capital-to-capital-for-the-commons/ Web version].

Apart from the [https://ioo.coop/ internet of ownership directory], I maintain the following pages:

* [[:Category:Platform_Cooperatives | Platform Cooperatives]] (76 items)
* [[:Category:Labor | Labor]] (687 items)
* [[:Category:Cooperatives | Cooperatives]] (623 items)

Also working on a video directory here [https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Platform_Cooperativism_2016 on Platform Cooperativism 2016], which I would like to extend with other conference presentation material, including those of the Coop des Communs

Please note we just finished a report for ETUI/ETUC with Vasilis Niaros who can give access to the draft version via email request

I think the report for the Boll Foundation, focusing on value sovereignity, transvestment strategies, reverse cooptation of capital and state mechanisms, and open and contributory value accounting mechanisms, might also be of interest: [http://www.p2plab.gr/en/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Value-in-the-Commons-Economy.pdf Value in the Commons Economy]

=== Pat Conaty ===

"The work of the ILO on developing the ILO Recommendation 193 on the promotion of Co-operatives is a key policy hook for us. Ditto the work of Simel Esim and the Co-op Unit at the ILO and their project on Future Work. Also what Bruno Roelants highlighted in his talk in Brussels about the long history of CECOP members developing innovative forms of co-operative economic democracy is salient. We need to ensure we build upon this wisdom and expertise. Moreover as he said, false and bogus co-ops are a danger we need to be well aware of.

From a bird’s eye view, this essay from Professor Guy Standing (who worked for decades at the ILO) is pertinent to what we are trying to do. His books on the Precariat are insightful and he forecast shortly after the 2008 crisis a Shock Doctrine advancing and rolling back year by year economic rights, social rights, cultural rights and political rights for increasing numbers of workers. Hence the dire state we are in

He also forecasted in [https://www.opendemocracy.net/guy-standing/precariat-why-it-needs-deliberative-democracy this essay in 2012] the danger of the far right. His three part analysis of the precariat is helpful to see the social divisions being promoted currently.  I would encourage people to read the essay in advance of our discussion as his work more recent book on a Precariat Charter refers to ways and means for deepening democracy, battling against the roll back of human rights and how we need to harness commons, co-ops and solidarity economics to develop an anti-austerity common programme.

Karl Polanyi’s case for co-op commons is profound and this was made in 1944. [http://commonstransition.org/co-operative-commonwealth-de-commodifying-land-and-money-part-1/ This essay] gives plenty of examples in the co-op tradition that have been forgotten about and examples today like Community Land Trusts that have their origins in the co-op movements of the past."

* Michael Peck from the USA is good. He has been doing leading edge work in the USA on Union Co-op innovation with the United Steelworkers and Mondragon co-ops. [http://1worker1vote.org/bipartisan-future-work/]
* the work of the ILO on developing the ILO Recommendation 193 on the promotion of Co-operatives is a key policy hook for us. Ditto the work of Simel Esim and the Co-op Unit at the ILO and their project on Future Work. 
* Also what Bruno Roelants highlighted in his talk in Brussels about the long history of CECOP members developing innovative forms of co-operative economic democracy is salient. We need to ensure we build upon this wisdom and expertise. Moreover as he said, false and bogus co-ops are a danger we need to be well aware of.

=== Simel Esim ===

"Kindly note that we had prepared a discussion note on “[http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/cooperatives/news/WCMS_537002/lang--en/index.htm Cooperation in a changing world of work: Exploring the role of cooperatives in the future of work]” prior to the event which we share here with you.
 
Based on our presentation and the discussions in Brussels we will be revising this note imminently in its short version, but also working on a more elaborated version in the context of the ILO DG’s future of work initiative. [http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/future-of-work/lang--en/index.htm]
 
Our strategy in engaging with cooperatives continues to be two-prong: a) integrating decent work as a priority for cooperatives; and b) ensuring cooperatives are recognized and adopted among key means for delivery on the ILO’s decent work agenda for a sustainable future of work."

The following from the ilo might be of interest to you in your work around trade unions and cooperatives (emphasis on worker cooperatives) 

* [http://www.ilo.org/global/docs/WCMS_211250/lang--en/index.htm Trade unions and worker cooperatives: Where are we at?]; [http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@ed_dialogue/@actrav/documents/publication/wcms_240534.pdf Full PDF]
* [http://www.ilo.org/actrav/media-center/news/WCMS_312010/lang--en/index.htm Job preservation through the creation of worker cooperatives: Lessons for trade unions]

=== Mayo Fuster Morell ===

* Procomuns Declaration with 120 policy recommendations to support commons and platform cooperativism production by administrations resulting from a large participative process: [http://procomuns.net/en/policy/Articles] 

===Stacco Troncoso ===

"Here is a list of resources on Open and Platform Cooperativism culled from the P2P Foundation web ecosystem: 
 
* '''Commons Transition:''' [http://commonstransition.org/open-cooperativism/ Open Cooperativism Definition], [http://commonstransition.org/category/subjects/open-cooperativism/ Stories on Open Cooperativism]. See also [http://commonstransition.org/category/subjects/open-cooperativism/ David Bollier’s and Pat Conaty’s Open Coops report].
* '''Commons Transition Wiki:''' [http://wiki.commonstransition.org/wiki/Category:Open_Cooperativism Open Coops Category].
* '''For P2P Foundation Wiki''' documentation on Open and Platform, see our [[Cooperatives | Cooperatives Section]] and dedicated sections on [[Open Cooperativism]] and [[Platform Cooperatives]], as well as [[:category:Open Company Formats | Open Company Formats]].
* '''P2P Foundation Blog:''' Stories on [https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/category/channels-streams/open-coops-sustainable-livelihoods Open Cooperativism and Sustainable Livelihoods]

Here are resources for Commons-based law and regulations: [http://wiki.commonstransition.org/wiki/Law_for_the_Commons Law for the Commons Wiki].

=== Louis Cousin ===

Here is what we have on our side:

* [https://coopseurope.coop/sites/default/files/Paper_Cooperatives%20Collab%20Economy__0.pdf Cooperative Platforms in a European Landscape: An Exploratory Study]
* [https://www.sommetinter.coop/fr/cdn/farfuture/98pB-UgmvVjitQfG9dzp2ezCmH3pVuNXRTgWAp2YB-A/mtime%3A1476039013/sites/default/files/etude/files/grace16-etude-eng_0.pdf Global Research on Augmented Collaborative Economy 2016].

==More Information==


[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:P2P Economic Networks]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Post-Corporate]]

[[Category:Platform Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Open Cooperativism]]