
'''* Article: Marry Mellor, ”Could the money system be the basis of a sufficiency economy?”, real-world economics review, issue no. 54, 27 September 2010, pp. 79-88''' 

URL = http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue54/Mellor54.pdf


=Description=

Marry Mellor:

"In Issue 53 of the real-world economics review Richard Smith called for ‘a practical, workable post-capitalist ecological economy, an economy by the people, for the people, that is geared to production for need, not for profit’ (2010:42). He suggests economic theorists should ‘go back to the drawing board’ to re-frame how such an economy would operate. In my book The Future of Money I have explored whether the money system could be a possible mechanism for achieving a socially just, democratically administered, sufficiency economy (2010a). A sufficiency economy would be one oriented to meeting people’s material needs to the minimum necessary to enable a high quality of life for all. My case for advocating the money system is that as a socially constructed intangible economic form it is most immediately amenable to collective social action. As Geoffrey Ingham has argued ‘money...is the most powerful of the social technologies’ (2004: 202). A major proviso is that even radial reform of the money system will not eliminate the private ownership and control of tangible economic resources, a key element of the capitalist economy, but it could provide a stepping stone to radical social change.

Those arguing for an ecologically sustainable economy point to the destructive nature of the capitalist market (Scott Cato 2006). This is mainly in terms of externalities and the drive for growth (Scott Cato 2009). Value is attributed to those activities and resources that can immediately access and generate money. Resources not already in private ownership are treated as free goods, and market prices do not take account of long term damage to the environment. The capitalist financial system also drives growth as the search for profits drives competition and expansion together with the reliance on debt-based bank credit to fund the monetary circuit (Rossi 2007, Parguez & Seccareccia 2000). Ecofeminist political economy adds to the ecological critique by pointing out that much of women’s work and lives is excluded from the money-based economy (Mellor 2010b). The market economy and the public economy both frame their activities in money terms, externalising unpaid community and domestic activities. The real economy in ecological and feminist terms would embrace all aspects of the provisioning conditions for human existence to include unpaid work and environmental resources , damage and resilience.

So why see money as the key to developing a sufficiency economy? It is true that money has had a bad press. Love of it is the root of all evil. It commodifies and alienates human relationships. It is the mechanism of the extraction of profit and capital accumulation. At the same time it is arguably a symbol of social trust in that people honour it in their dealings, and it can be, potentially if not actually, an instrument of social policy. What is even more important is the evidence, particularly in the recent financial crisis, that the only mechanism that stands behind money systems is the state as representing the collective economic resilience of the population. While the state can create and circulate money ex nihilo, it still relies on social trust and acknowledgement of that money to enable it to circulate, its power to tax and the collective activities of the people in accepting that money as a reward for labour."


From the conclusion:

"This paper has argued that the money system is a national resource that should be taken seriously as a mechanism for radical social change. The case has been made that money cannot be anything other than social, as there is no ‘natural’ base for it. While the money system is both social and public, its administration has been privatised, particularly the issue of new money. This is important because the ability to issue money in a society creates the ability to define what is to be seen as valuable (in money terms). Letting the market harness the allocation of money has prevented the recognition of value created by the environment, non-market activities and public investment. Largely, the financial sector has been able to allocate value to itself by issuing money to itself. Allocating money to citizens as of right or to public investment would give a completely different message about what is important in society.

Such a system of money allocation would not require growth other than to meet need because most money would be issued free of debt. Security of money allocation for consumption and production would remove the need to undertake unnecessary work and enable people to be confident of a sufficiency of material goods with more emphasis on the quality of life. Overall priorities would also put public welfare first (hospitals, education, transport) which would make people feel more secure about their future. This would mean they did not need to accumulate money savings. The problem with aiming to achieve future security in money terms is that there is no way people can know what their money will buy. While sufficiency can be calculated in real terms (how much bread will I need?), there is no basis for sufficiency in money terms (what will bread cost in thirty years’ time?). Returning the money system to democratic control would not be a total answer but it would be an incredible step forward towards creating a socially just and ecologically sustainable sufficiency economy.

Where would that leave ‘the market’? It would not be able to access new money from banks. Any money for investment would be a direct transfer of savings as equity or timed loans. However where firms (for profit or not for profit) were meeting democratically identified priorities they could request loans or grants from national, regional, or local democratically controlled banks. Firms would earn money by providing the goods and services that citizens 
socially determine. Instead of money circulating through the market to create ‘wealth’ which is then taxed (under much protest) for public use, public benefit would be the basis for the allocation of money. Administration via a public money system would avoid both the rigidity of a command and control economy and the speculative exploitation, waste and inequality of a capitalist market. From a public perspective the fiscal and monetary systems would be two sides of the same process. Public expenditure would not require taxation but taxation would be used to regulate the economy, redistribute wealth and influence resource use or social benefit (including fair labour policies). The endogenous money circuit of capitalist production would be replaced by the endogenous money circuit of a public economy. As such it would respond not to the demands of profitable production but the provisioning of social need."



=Discussion=

==Why Not Do Away With Money Alltogether?==

Marry Mellor:

"A range of greens, social transformers and social libertarians have made the case for abolishing or reforming national systems of money (Large 2010 Greco 2009, Bennholdt -Thomsen et al 1999). Feminists have also debated long and hard about whether domestic work should receive a wage and often rejected it as crystallising the inequalities inherent in domestic labour. My case for not rejecting a national (or international) money system is that I do not see how complex societies can operate without a generalised mechanism of valuing human activities and fairly allocating goods, services and resources. This case is enforced by the fact that most examples put forward for how local economies would operate involve either localising the existing market system (e.g. farmers markets, craft fairs, etc.) or building new local economic systems based on some alternative means of accounting. In the later case there needs to be either a prior issue of local tokens (Ithaca Hours, Stroud Pounds, etc.) or a central system of recording the interchange of activities as in a LETS scheme (North 2009). What is notable about such local innovations is that it is the money/accounting system that creates the economic circuit, not the interchange of activities that produces an organic emergence of some form of represented value.

This will come as no surprise to social theorists of money. The most important aspect of money is not that it circulates to enable economic exchange, but that it has to be created and issued. This is often skated over in the conventional discussion of money in market systems. The commodity view of money sees it as emerging out of an original market that is assumed to be based on barter. One commodity is adopted as a medium of exchange to solve the problem of finding suitable mutual exchanges. A valuable, durable, divisible and portable commodity is chosen such as gold or silver. From this ‘metallist’ perspective, money is both natural and neutral. It is natural in that the value of money is assumed to relate back ultimately to the intrinsic value of the commodity, usually based on its scarcity or special qualities. It is neutral because commodity money only represents a prior value as between relative goods.

While the shift from barter to gold/silver, to paper representation is still told, the commodity theory of money has been extensively challenged. As Parguez & Seccareccia argue ‘the very notion of a commodity money is an illusion’ (2000:106).The opposing view is a social theory of money (Innes 1914/2004, Ingham 2004, Smithin 2009). This rejects the barter story, pointing out that money had a variety of early uses such as tribute, wergeld (injury payment) or temple money (offerings). It is also pointed out that money has appeared in many types of society and in many different forms. The emphasis on metal coinage in western economic thinking reflects the fact that in Europe coin emerged a thousand years before banking. However in historical terms the banking and accounting functions are thousands of years older than coinage. Even in the case of coin, the link with precious metal was tenuous as Mitchell Innes pointed out as early as 1913. Rarely was the nominal value of coins the same as the value of the metal of which it they were made (Innes 1913/2004). Given the varying amount of precious metal in coins, the only guarantee of the worth of the coin became the authority behind the minting. Far from being a precious commodity that had become readily accepted through trade as the barter theorists thought, money as coin has generally been issued by fiat, that is, issued and guaranteed by an authority, such as a powerful leader, an office-holder or a religious organisation. In fact, as Davies has argued, when coins were too closely associated with scarce precious metal, economic activities became restricted. Economies flourished where coins were plentiful, such that ‘long run trends in depression and prosperity correlate extremely well with the precious metal famine 
and surplus of the Middle Ages’ (Davies 2002:646). Even debasement of the coinage through reducing the precious metal content was not in itself a problem as the countries which experienced the greatest economic growth were those whose leaders had ‘indulged in the most severe debasement’ of their coinage’ (Davies 2002:647).

As Rossi argues, money cannot be a commodity because its value would need to be established using another standard of value such that ‘infinite recursivity makes this measurement logically impossible’ (2007:13). Money value is therefore much less certain than even an arbitrary measure such as an inch. Once an inch is chosen as a unit of measurement it stays constant whereas money as a unit of measurement can never be assumed to be constant no matter what it is made of. For Ingham money does not in itself embody a value, it measures relative values. He argues that the market could not exist without a means of establishing relative value and therefore money as a unit of measurement is ‘logically anterior and historically prior to market exchange’ (2004:25). Measuring value in economic exchange is much more important than the actual medium used to transfer value. Money should be seen not as a ‘thing’ but as a social form (2004:80) and the idea that there is some ‘invariant monetary standard’ is a ‘working fiction’ (2004:144). ‘Sound money’ is a product of society, not of nature. Money is something that people trust to maintain its value or be honoured in trade, while its actual value can vary. Effectively when we say people trust in money they are trusting in the organisations, society and authorities that create and circulate it, other people, traders, the banks and the state. Money, whatever its form, is a social construction not a natural form. However as a social form it represents power (Hutchinson, Mellor and Olsen 2002:211)."
(http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue54/Mellor54.pdf)

==Power and the issue of money==


"Power is central to the issue and circulation of money. As Wray (2004), Ingham (2004) and others have pointed out, states or other monetary authorities have used their power to establish the circulation of money either as accounting records or as physical tokens such as clay tablets, tally sticks or coin. Money systems can also be established by consent as indicated earlier for local money systems, but establishment through power or authority has historically been the main mechanism. The state theory of money was set out by Georg Knapp in the early 1900s (1924). Central to his ideas was a link between the issue and circulation of token money and state taxation. Rather than demanding goods and services directly, states ‘buy’ goods and services issuing what is effectively an IOU while at the same time demanding tax payment in a form of money that it designates. As Wray points out, ‘what Knapp called the state money stage begins when the state chooses the unit of account and names the thing that it accepts in payment of obligation to itself - at the nominal value it assigns to the thing. The final step occurs when the state actually issues the money things it accepts’ (2004:243). Why should people give up their labour, goods or resources for a worthless accounting record, tablet, stick or coin? Because tax is demanded that must be paid by that same mechanism. As those people not directly subject to state ‘purchase’ also need to pay taxes, the money-tokens circulate more widely in the economy and become generally accepted. Taxation must also not reclaim all the IOU’s otherwise there would be no mechanism for general circulation. The state must therefore always be in deficit, an important lesson for today’s advocates of a balanced budget.

State money theorists point out that there is no artificial limit within a monetary system to how much money a state or political authority can issue, provided it doesn’t outstrip
the capacity of the people to produce and circulate goods and services. There is no need for a state to contract any debt other than through the issue of its own IOUs. As Nersisyan and Wray argue in Issue 53 of the real-world economics review ‘there is no financial constraint on the ability of a sovereign nation to deficit spend’ (2010:123). Quite the contrary ‘every recession since World War II was preceded by a government surplus or a declining deficit-to-GDP ratio (2010:120). The problem is that the state role in the issue of money has been virtually obliterated in modern economies. Money has been privatised through the issue of money through banks as debt."
(http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue54/Mellor54.pdf)


==References==

A selection:

#Bennholdt-Thomsen Veronika and Maria Mies (1999) The Subsistence Perspective London, Zed Press
#Greco, Thomas H (2009) The End of Money and the Future of Civilization Floris Books, Edinburgh
#Hutchinson, F., Mellor, M. and Olsen, W. (2002) The Politics of Money Pluto Press, London
#Ingham, Geoffrey (2004) The Nature of Money Polity, Cambridge
#Innes, Mitchell A (1913/2004) What is Money? (in) Wray, L Randall (2004) Credit and State Theories of Money: The contribution of A. Mitchell Innes Edward Elgar, Cheltenham
#Innes, Mitchell A (1914/2004) The Credit Theory of Money (in) Wray, L Randall (2004) Credit and State Theories of Money: The contribution of A. Mitchell Innes Edward Elgar, Cheltenham
#Knapp, G.F. (1924) The State Theory of Money Macmillan, London
#Large, Martin (2010) Common Wealth for a free, equal, mutual and sustainable society Hawthorn Press, Stroud
#Mellor, Mary (2010a) The Future of Money: From financial crisis to public resource Pluto, London
#Mellor, Mary (2010b) Ecofeminist Political Economy and the Politics of Money (in) Ariel Salleh (ed) Eco-Sufficiency and Global Justice Pluto Press, London
#North, Peter (2007) Money and Liberation, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
#Parguez, Alain & Mario Seccareccia (2000) The credit theory of money: the money circuit approach (in) John Smithin (Ed) What is Money? Routledge London
#Scott Cato, Molly (2009) Green Economics Earthscan, London
#Scott Cato, Molly (2006) Market Schmarket: Building the Post Capitalist Economy New Clarion Press, Cheltenham
#Tobin, J (1963) Commercial Banks and Creators of Money (in) D. Carson (ed) Banking and Monetary Studies Unwin, Homewood, Illinois
#Wray, L Randall (2004) Conclusion: The Credit Money and State Money Approaches (in) Randall Wray (ed) Credit and State Theories of Money: The contribution of A. Mitchell Innes Edward Elgar, Cheltenham

=More Information=

Author e-mail: m.mellor@northumbria.ac.uk


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Articles]]