
'''= series in Kosmos Journal by James Quilligan'''


=Description=

"This series of articles will attempt to reconceptualize the social and natural order of economics through an analysis of the commons—the natural, genetic, physical, social, cultural and intellectual resources which people manage by negotiating their own norms and rules. (For brevity’s sake, Part One uses the term ‘commons’ loosely to refer to both self-organized commons and unorganized common pool resources—a distinction which will be spelled out in subsequent articles.) The recurring theme in these writings is the creation of a commons-based economy which expresses a more inclusive type of value than in traditional economics. A common theory of value—rooted in philosophy, psychology, sociology, anthropology, linguistics, communication, organizational behavior, technology, history, culture, environmentalism, economics, law, and social and political theory—will explore many of the leading ontological presuppositions in our present belief systems."


=Directory=

* Part One, http://www.kosmosjournal.org/article/toward-a-common-theory-of-value-part-one-common-being/

* Part Two, http://www.kosmosjournal.org/article/toward-a-common-theory-of-value-part-two-common-trust/

" Karl Polanyi called Aristotle’s economic formulation “probably the most
prophetic pointer ever made in the realm of the social sciences;
it is certainly still the best analysis of the subject we possess” (The
Great Transformation, 43). Yet, as Part Two suggests, Aristotle’s
guideline needs to be recalibrated for the economic realities of
the 21st century, since household sufficiency doesn’t begin to describe
the many facets of the commons that we recognize today."


* Part Three, http://www.kosmosjournal.org/article/toward-a-common-theory-of-value-part-three-common-knowing/

Part Three broadens this inquiry by considering the epistemology which underlies Aristotle’s framework. It analyzes how our economic knowledge is predicated on the ways we know.


* Part Four, http://www.kosmosjournal.org/article/toward-a-common-theory-of-value-part-four-common-need/

"This article shows how such top-down models (intellect over instinct, person over property, capital over labor, rich over poor, supply over demand, wealth over well-being, society over nature, State over community, global over local) are just as much a part of economic history and present day policy as the horizontal forms of human exchange."


* Part Five, http://www.kosmosjournal.org/article/toward-a-common-theory-of-value-part-five-common-development/

"The previous articles in this series considered how objective and subjective principles have been applied in economic thinking. We noted that the left hemisphere of the human brain is categorical and sequential in its objective construction of reality, building the edifice of knowledge up from fragments, piece by piece, to the larger system. By contrast, the right brain experiences the world as timeless Being, a great flowing network of subjective interconnection and unity, processing reality from the Whole to the Part. 

Until 6th century BCE, the social applications of these two hemispheres seem to have been in relative balance—neither was favored over the other. But a close look at the writing, diagrams, formulas, maps, historical and natural records from that historical period indicates how the left hemisphere began to dominate within individuals and society. Aristotle was the first to examine this phenomenon in economic terms (Politics, 350 BCE). He wondered why M-C-M’ (the Money-making utility of trade in the marketplace) was eclipsing C-M-C’ (the sharing of useful Commodities in the household). He worried that the Part was separating from the Whole of the commons, where value really comes into existence. "

=Excerpts=

==On [[Commons Economics]]==

James Quilligan:

"A commons-based economics raises the possibility of experiencing
value through the practical relationships that arise among individuals,
the resources of the world, and that which exists between
people and the world. This challenges the (neo)liberal orthodoxy
of Immanuel Kant, who said that the non-empirical nature of
metaphysics lies beyond immediate experience, whether external
or internal. By revealing the connection between outer and inner
experience, which are two completely different sources of knowledge,
the commons offer analytic constructs which have previously
been neglected, preventing economics from reflecting the
real human condition. A commons-based economy arises from
where we live and how and what we do. These articles propose a
common turn—a theory of value bringing right understanding of
the world without having to reach for a final explanation of its
existence or rely on some parallel universe of economic abstractions.

The delineation of this common worldview, arising from both
outer and inner experience, provides the foundation of a new essentialism
in economics and even suggests the outlines of a teleological
structure (an emergent stage development sequence in
economics will be explored in subsequent articles). It also provides
a way of examining the premises of the Market State and understanding
how the present social order may be transformed at all
levels—local, state, interstate, regional and global—through institutions
and policies of shared production and shared governance."
(http://www.kosmosjournal.org/wp-content/article-pdfs/toward-a-common-theory-of-value-part-one-common-being.pdf)


==The Pendulum between embedded and disembedded monetary systems==

James Quilligan:

"Many reviews of economic history begin with gifts, move to
barter, and then explore money, banking and credit. But as numerous
scholars have observed, barter has played only a marginal
role in economic exchange. Anthropologist David Graeber (Debt:
The First 5,000 Years) maintains that credit existed long before
barter and money. Surveying the monetary history of world civilization,
he traces long-term swings between credit and debt systems
in which barter was not a significant factor (Figure 1).

During eras like the Agrarian Age and the Middle Ages, for example,
virtual credit systems were dominant and the economy
was deeply embedded in everyday households and communities
(C-M-C’). Economists Bernard Lietaer and Stephen Belgin (New
Money for a New World) have described how the principle of demurrage—a
fee charged for holding a currency without spending
it—created prosperous societies in Ancient Egypt and Medieval
Europe through a form of social sharing and redistribution based
on credit. Serving as a kind of deflationary algorithm or negative
interest rate, demurrage supported the polycentric values of matriarchal
culture, customary traditions and community democracy
(although such societies were not completely free from
centralized command structures of production and distribution).

Following these long stages of social cohesion and interconnectedness
backed by credit, the historical pendulum veered to debtbased
systems of money (M-C-M’), which encourage individual
separation and social disconnection. During periods such as the
Roman Empire and Modern Capitalism, powerful monocentric
systems (of hierarchy and patriarchy) impose a single currency
upon citizens to ensure the payment of tributes or taxes to a governing
authority. The economy is disembedded from society
through the accumulation and concentration of capital by a ruling
class and the separation of local resource producers and users.
For the people in these communities, oppressed by hierarchical
governance, consolidation of wealth and debt payments, daily life
is conflictual, static and isolated."
(http://www.kosmosjournal.org/wp-content/article-pdfs/toward-a-common-theory-of-value-part-two-common-trust.pdf)


==On the necessary return of [[Inalienablity]]==

James Quilligan:

"The Internet has launched an unprecedented period of sharing
and collective action. Open software communities, wikis and collaborative
websites have become an extraordinary source of productivity,
innovation and efficiency. Self-organized resource
communities such as Trade School, Gift Circle, Giftflow, Neighborgoods
and Shareable are demonstrating new possibilities for
decentralized creativity, inclusiveness and cooperation in the circulation
of resources. These open networks are helping people
rediscover the self-determined customs and norms that traditional
communities have always used in nurturing and protecting
their common resources, whether in fishing grounds, grazing
pastures or community plazas. Increasingly, resource producers
and users are becoming active participants in their own cultures,
revitalizing their communities through open source incentives
and creating an inclusive sense of self. From Slow Food and Slow
Money to free software and open access publishing, new forms
of community self-organization and social technology are restoring
human relationships to their former connectedness and sufficiency
in local values.

'''At the heart of these social ethics and practices is the principle of inalienability, a recognition that our individual, separate selves are vitally connected to other people and to the Earth. Since our Being is inseparable at this foundational level, we realize that the greater cycle of natural and social gifts—which we inherit from
our ancestors, enjoy during our lifetimes, and pass on to those who come after us—must be protected from the expropriating grasp of ownership, profit and interest. Inalienability teaches that the commons are so essential to human life and identity that they should never be turned into fungible units of money or commodities for the marketplace.''' 

This realization of Being—expressed
through the humility and gratitude of gift exchange—resists
all monetization of the commons through cash exchanges,
legal contracts, commodification or property rights. Such enclosures
destroy natural resources, undermine social relationships,
dehumanize individuals into passive consumers and dispossess
people from their commons."
(http://www.kosmosjournal.org/wp-content/article-pdfs/toward-a-common-theory-of-value-part-two-common-trust.pdf)

=More Information=

* [[Commons Economics]]
* [[Value]]


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]