
* Essay: Democratizing Rural Economy: Institutional Friction, Sustainable Struggle and the Cooperative Movement. By Patrick H. Mooney, Department of Sociology, University of Kentucky. Rural Sociology 69(1), 2004, pp. 76–98

URL ?


=Description=

"ABSTRACT Sustainable development demands institutions manage the
conflicts and struggles that inevitably arise over material and ideal interests.
While current cooperative theory privileges the economic element, a political
economy of cooperation emphasizes cooperatives' tentative bridging of
economic and political spheres with a democratic ethos. The cooperatives'
democratic political structure exists in tension with a capitalist economic
structure and other sites of friction. These contradictions are: in the realm of
social relations, between production and consumption; in the realm
of spatial relations, between the local and the global; and in the realm of
collective action, between cooperatives as both traditional as well as new
social movements.Where neo-classical economic models seek to eliminate or
reduce these tensions, political economy views these tensions as functional to
sustainability by creating an institutional friction that facilitates innovation,
flexibility and long-term adaptability. This political economy of
cooperation is intended as a step toward the development of a multidimensional
sociology of cooperation."


=Excerpt=

"Rather than a utopian vision of an ultimate end to struggle between
social groups, what is needed are mechanisms and institutions that
permit the sustainability of struggle in legitimate institutions. In the
United States, one of the most important and commonly proclaimed
values is that of democratic forms of participation. It is argued here that
formal cooperation privileges a democratic structure within an
economy that is generally driven by quite different social forces and
forms of organization. In this sense, cooperatives can potentially pave
the bridge between polity and economy with a democratic ethos. This
corresponds to Busch's (2000:3) recent call to "extend networks of
democracy to the workplace" as a means by which we can begin to
reclaim our moral responsibility from what he calls the Leviathans
of statism, scientism, and, especially in this case, marketism.

This argument derives from two primary concerns. One concern
follows Verta Taylor's (1989) interest in the need to understand
mobilization as a long-term form of struggle, rather than the episodic
manner in which it is often treated by both sociologists as well as
historians (Mooney and Majka 1995; Mooney and Hunt 1996). A
second concern involves the economic reductionism in most contemporary
modeling of formal agricultural cooperation. Together, these
form a point of departure for an original, alternative approach to the
analysis of cooperatives. This framework emphasizes cooperatives'
capacity to generate a flexible and sustainable form of struggle by
focusing on the importance of retaining a sense of contradiction and
tension, even paradox, within the theorization of cooperation. The
focus is on institutionalized cooperation in U.S. agriculture. The use of
the term "institutionalized cooperation" is intended as a somewhat
broader definition of cooperative than a purely legalistic conception
would provide. Thus, to adapt Cobia's (1989) definition, we are
speaking of patterned, formal or informal, economic activity that is
user-owned, user-controlled, and distributes benefits on the basis of use.
Implicit in this definition is the contention that retaining ownership,
control, and benefit for the user-members is also an inherently political
action in the context of a developed capitalist economy."



=More Information=

Patrick H. Mooney, 1537 Patterson Office Tower, Department of Sociology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0027. 

Email: SOC168@uky.edu


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]