=Proposal=

Source: '''Whitepaper: Open Climate. Leveraging blockchain for a global, transparent and integrated climate accounting system'''. By Martin E. Wainstein.

([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])


==Six project pillars: guidelines for success in the application of blockchain for global climate accounting==

By Martin Wainstein:

"We propose the Open Climate platform and system based on 6
key pillars. These pillars constitute critical insights derived
from a landscape research and analysis of what constitutes
success in the blockchain and climate intersection, briefly
presented in section 1. These insights have been translated to
the main design guidelines and features of the system. From
these 6 pillars, we have defined the 5 climate dimensions that
the project’s scope encompasses, and the 4 integrated layers
that the software development effort comprises. This section
describes the pillars, dimensions and layers of the project.

Figure 2 provides a graphical abstract of this outline

These pillars can be understood as the underlying
assumptions of the project based on our accumulated
research, as well as their accompanied resulting guidelines
that have been considered in the project’s scope and
architecture. The pillars are therefore presented here as a set
of pairs; the insights about what the system should have the
capacity to do, and the resulting features that our current
prototype development includes. 


These pillars are:

===1. Consensus on the physical state of the planet=== 

> '''[[Earth Ledger]]'''

The main insight of this pillar has already been laid out above
in section 1.1. There needs to be a clear distinction between
the physical planet and the political world. The need for
consensus of the Earth’s ecosystem state and key ‘vital signs’
are three-fold. First, a robust and scientific consensus needs to
dispel any post-truth or climate skepticism from the general
public, it needs to clearly record ‘the facts.’ Second, this data
sets the baseline for all science-based climate targets from
state and non-state actors. It also facilitates the evaluation of
the aggregate effect of climate actor’s collective efforts. Finally,
an established immutable value on a distributed ledger can be
used for smart contracts to automate certain processes that
need to be based on physical metrics. For example, a smart
contract can deterministically tie carbon pricing to the
remaining planetary carbon budget relative to a 1.5oC target
using on-chain records.

This pillar is translated in the concept of an Earth ledger.
Section [3.1] describes the architecture and process flow to
operate a decentralized carbon budget accounting
mechanism, involving global CO2 internet-connected sensors,
multi-source oracles, integrated assessment models, and
Earth system governance to manage uncertainty ranges. While
we focus here on the carbon modules of the Earth ledger, this
is but one of many modules to consider. A natural extension of
it could include the tracking of all planetary boundaries
(Rockstrom et al., 2009)."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])


===2. Seamless inclusion of state and non-state actions=== 

> '''Nested accounting'''

Also outlined in section 1 is the importance of the capacity of
a global climate accounting system to combine both
commitments, actions and politics pertaining to nation-states,
as well as those from all NSAs. This feature needs to be
achieved without any risk of double counting, which happens
to be one of the main values of distributed ledger technologies.
This integration should be designed to take advantage of
positive feedback loops involved in a win-win dynamic
between state and NSA. Namely, accounting the actions of
NSAs lessens the climate burden of the national governments,
thus fostering federal incentives to support NSAs actions and
the capacity building to utilize the same accounting
methodologies. With incentives and motivation, NSAs can
mobilize the lion share of capital required in finance the
climate transition. Conversely, if an elected government from
a nation-state loses track of scientific facts and shows
minimum signs of planetary stewardship, a mechanism that
incorporates NSA accounting can enable a country to maintain
a paris-consistent track irrespective of the federal position. A
clear example of this dynamic is seen with the Trump
administration of the United States of America in regard to the
potential pullout of the Paris Agreement, which lead to the
immediate NSA backlash in the form of the #WeAreStillIn
coalition.

This pillar is translated in a proposed protocol to automate
nested accounting of climate actions. This means that, for
example, the mitigation certificates generated and retired by a
forest conservation project developed by a private actor
would automatically be included in the fulfillment of climate
commitments of the subnational actor (eg. the province or
region in which the project or company is located), and
subsequently the nationally determined contribution of the
involved country. If the mitigation certificates are sold from
the private developer to a company incorporated in a different
jurisdiction —and are retired by the buying actor— then,
subject to countries approval, the accounting of those actions
would fall under the nested scopes involved in the buyer’s
jurisdiction. A nested accounting mechanism essentially
operates the guidelines laid forth in article 6 of the Paris
Agreement. Section 3.2.2 describes the architecture and
process flow of this proposed features.


===3. Linking of all climate related information with financial value mobilization=== 

> '''5 integrated climate domains'''

One of our analysis’ main insight is that one of the most
important values of blockchain and related technologies to
climate accounting is the capacity to integrate multiple
climate-related records with financial capital. Leveraging the
financial technology aspects of blockchains and smart 
contracts can automate rules for deploying financial capital
under positive feedback loop dynamics. In other words,
different climate accounting aspects —which includes Earth
data records, commitments of actors, the tracking of their
progress, the minting of certificates attesting to their tracked
action, and the transactions associated to the trading of these
certificates— have dynamic influences between them, and the
collective supply chain of this climate value information must
inform and directly drive climate finance. This allows the
application of smart contracts and digital finance to directly
link capital with climate value in a low-cost a frictionless way.

This can either take the form of tax burdens or pricing
associated to negative climate value, and capital financing and
rewards for positive climate value creation.

This pillar is translated in a significantly broad scope of the
project, involving the proposed direct linking of 5 different
climate domains. These domains are: the Climate System (the
physical dimension), Climate Agreements and their Actors
(the political dimension and required registries), Climate
Assets (the certifications of actions), Climate Markets (the
networks and rules for transacting those assets) and Climate
Finance (the mobilization of capital to finance climate value).

Figure 3 shows a metadiagram of this multi-domain
integration of climate aspects that can be associated to ledger
records. This concept supports the proposition of using a
‘ledger of ledgers’ and smart contracts to orchestrate a
positive system dynamic of finance and information flow. In
fact, the metadiagram in figure 3 conveys the scope of the open
climate project and the incorporation of pillars 1 to 3.


===4. Intuitive and accessible user interface covering all aspects of the system=== 

> '''Open climate portal'''

Blockchain, distributed ledgers and smart contracts are
intricate concepts for the general public. Key climate data and
actor’s action progress and accountability are scattered in
different platforms, making it hard for both key stakeholders
and general public to keep track of. As such, this pillar’s main
insight is the value of a one-stop-shop portal that can connect
all meaningful climate accounting records and functions under
the same user interface.

A single portal does not necessarily go against the
decentralized nature of the project. Front-end software
technology through the use of APIs, block explorers and secure
credentials, can act as portals to an underlying network with
multiple platforms and blockchain ecosystems, and allow
logged in users to operate climate functions (eg. accounting,
reporting, trading) hosted in different platforms but accessed
through the same interface. Having the capacity to do this
reduces reporting fatigue from actors that require compliant
processes, simplifies user experience through intuitive
processes and provide a main function for climate
transparency and visibility. As an example, technological
improvements in user experience have made the preparation
and filing of annual tax returns an accessible process for
layman citizens in the United States (eg. with the use of the
Turbo Tax software).

This pillar is translated in the creation of an open source frontend platform with special focus on intuitive user experiences
in the whole array of climate accounting functionality. 

Figures 5 and 6 shows examples of the growing number of screens
with multiple functionalities in the project’s front-end efforts.


===5. Capacity to interoperate between legacy and emerging technology climate platforms=== 

> '''Platform of platforms'''

As mentioned in section 1, blockchain applications in the
climate space should not try to replace existing climate
accounting frameworks but rather build on top of them to
drive higher levels of efficiency. Furthermore, the distributed
ledger technology space is characterized by a high levels of
entrepreneurial spirit and initiatives. If these are to directly
compete against each other with a zero-sum mindset, then the
capacity for having a unified climate accounting system is
reduced. In other words, the world would not benefit from
multiple carbon ledger systems that cannot interoperate with
one another. The planet’s atmosphere is still a single limited
space where all free greenhouse gases reside. Therefore, an
open climate system needs the capacity to involve both
existing legacy climate registries, platforms and databases,
with blockchain based environments that subsequently
should interoperate and reconcile records between each
other.

This pillar is translated into the effort of generating a platform
of platforms (or PoP). Figure 4 shows the role that this PoP has
as a middle layer between legacy and blockchain system,
integrating them through protocols and APIs, and
representing the collective in the user’s interface.


===6. Open source and radical collaboration=== 

> '''Consortium initiative towards a decentralized autonomous system'''

Last but certainly not list, the sixth pillar guiding this project
posits that the most important innovation the project should
focus on is not just what needs to be built, but how. This points
to the social innovation of driving software and solution
architecture development through a mindset of radical
collaboration, which puts forward a paradigm of unity among
all planetary stakeholders, rather than a mindset of
competition, which strengthens a paradigm and illusion of
separation. This is perhaps the most challenging aspect of the
project since modern innovation and technological progress
has been driven by the latter mindset and zero-sum dynamics.
The challenge of climate change and its irreversible erosion of
planetary resilience is perhaps the ultimate opportunity to
mobilize our mental structures. As such, a global climate
accounting system needs to have a strong foundation on open
data and open source software. A shared platform and its
constituent parts need to represent an ecosystem of digital
public goods for the global commons. This does not negate, yet
indeed challenges, the use of commercial business models.
Open source protocol layers can be compatible with
proprietary software built on top of it, but innovative business
models need to be introduced to allow developers and 
organizations to have the financial sustainability to operate
and maintain such a system.
This pillar translates not only into the open source publication
of the Open Climate platform’s software, but on the
development of a growing network of constituent platforms
that can use a consortium model and open innovation
framework to govern the initial development process. Part III
fully focuses on this aspect and pillar. Furthermore, once an
Open Climate PoP and system achieves the technological
readiness to operate at a global level, the project has the
intention to be released as a decentralized and autonomous
organization.

Perhaps one of the most powerful inventions underpinning
the bitcoin network, which catalyzed the blockchain
movement, is the fact that what was created was fully
emancipated from the hand of the creator (i.e. Satoshi
Nakamoto). This motivates the development of truly
decentralized systems that require innovative governance
schemes. An Open Climate platform and system, should be
driven by a mechanism of Earth system governance that can
tap into collective intelligence, rather than one centrally
managed by a powerful few."
([https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/gitbook-28427.appspot.com/o/assets%2F-LqvHPFhbHQiZy9q1yA0%2F-LspI8pHHJj72pPqqOlM%2F-LspIEV5N2P98gqsHxTK%2FWhitepaper_OpenClimate.pdf?])

=More information=

* [[OpenX Platform for Contractual Automation for P2P Project Finance of Climate Actions]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Global Governance]]