
(version francophone ci-bas)

=Text=

Michel Bauwens, October 2025:

Towards an Archipelago of Regenerative Places?

What does the third-place in Court-Saint-Etienne represent? What is the context that makes this project something which is not only anchored in a specific place, but also transcends it?

The context is indeed a kind of general crisis of the societal model that is the product of Western modernity, and which has been adopted worldwide. But this model has reached its limits, and its 'integrative' power is waning. The dominant model in crisis is primarily an extractive model, i.e., a value regime that demands the exploitation of nature and humans first, to extract commodities that are sold for profit. Subsequently, the state institution extracts taxes dedicated to social redistribution and ecological protection. But on both fronts, there has been regression, and moreover, the rest of the world is in revolt against Western hegemony. Gradually, the surplus value that flowed to the West is diminishing and local means are impoverishing in a Europe and a France that have been deindustrialized for decades.


But what to do? Because criticizing a system is much easier than replacing it!

Fortunately, history shows us that changes in values are not at all exceptional, but rather the rule. And to understand the ongoing transition, it is above all necessary to know how to observe the new forms that represent a possible future.


Here are two strong trends that are already influencing this possible future.

The first is the 'peer-to-peer' dynamic. It is above all a technological possibility to scale up human collaboration and coordination. Peer-to-peer is the capacity for 'cosmo-local' self-organization, i.e., which combines both local collaborations, anchored in territories, and trans-local collaborations, through digital means. The vision that I defend, with my collaborators at the P2P Foundation, and which is based on 20 years of observing the innovative practices of pioneering communities, is a combination of two factors:

Locally, it is the practice of regenerative bioregionalism, i.e., the collaboration and coordination of all efforts to regenerate a specific region or territory.

Trans-locally, it is the coordination of communities of practitioners who engage in similar practices worldwide, in order to learn together and pool resources.


In short, cosmo-localism therefore proposes a new value regime, where everything that is heavy is local, and everything that is light is global and shared. Thus, it combines a relative relocalization of human production and transnational digital collaboration. This value regime is 'contributory', i.e., it recognizes not only the value of commodities, but the value of all contributions, both positive (from a social and ecological perspective) and 'negative', i.e., the recognition of negative impacts. Without going into detail in this short introduction, let's simply say that the tooling is already well in place. All these changes are therefore linked to the 'peer-to-peer' dynamic.

But the second form making its way is the practice and institution of the commons!

The commons have always existed and have been central to all historical societal forms but have unfortunately been obscured in modernity. In indigenous, community-based, and even monarchical and imperial societies, the commons were either the primordial institution or a balancing institution, the counterweight to the extractive competition of mercantile and state forces. The commons were the shared resources of local communities, managed collectively by villagers and parishioners. It was the institution that preserved and regenerated the soils and resources. 


Simply put, the commons are defined by three criteria:

* The shared resource, which can be physical or 'immaterial'.

* A community that creates, maintains, or defends it.

* Rules of governance that come from the community itself.


The shared pastures of the Middle Ages, the agreements between fishermen in Senegal, the mountain slopes in Switzerland, Austria, and Japan, all these are commons, but also the mutual aid societies of the working class (before they were statized by the Welfare State), and today, digital commons, like free software. Note that in the past, these commons were effectively 'local', but today digital commons can be trans-local.


This last point brings us back to the cosmo-localism we explained earlier.

Finally, just like monasteries, which were collective institutions in the past, physical places 'in common' are just as necessary. And this brings us precisely to the role played by third-places.

Third-places can be seen as 'physical' commons anchored in the territory, but also as 'phygital' places, i.e., places that link the local and the trans-local, the physical AND the digital.

Global geopolitics can be seen as a competition between a Western model in relative decline, where the market has been prime over the state since the neoliberal era, and the BRICS coalitions, which, driven by Russia and China, favor a 'state-centric' development, where the state is prime over the market.

But cosmo-localism presents a third way: an archipelago of regenerative villages or projects, which collaborate worldwide, and build communities centered around their collaborative commons, both local and trans-local. It is a new synthesis between human society, social and ecological necessities, and the technical capacities for scaling human collaborations that can cooperate with market and state forces, but can also work towards their own autonomy.

Ultimately, third-places have the potential to thoroughly renew the productive apparatus, starting in a territory but without being stuck in splendid isolation. The knowledge of the entire world is thus made available to the local population.


==More information==

To learn more:

The writings of Michel Bauwens, https://4thgenerationcivilization.substack.com/

Documentation on peer-to-peer practices, in France and elsewhere, https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/

=French text=

Michel Bauwens:

Vers un archipel de lieu régénératif ?


De quoi le tiers-lieu à Court-Saint-Etienne est-il le nom? Quel est le contexte qui fait de ce projet quelque chose qui est non seulement ancré dans un lieu précis, mais le dépasse ?


Le contexte est en effet une sorte de crise générale du modèle sociétal qui est le produit de la modernité occidentale, et qui a été repris dans le monde entier. Mais ce modèle a atteint ses limites, et son pouvoir ‘intégrateur’ est en perte de vitesse. Le modèle dominant en crise est en premier lieu un modèle extractif, c.a.d. un régime de valeur qui demande que l’on exploite d’abord la nature et l’homme, pour en extraire des marchandise, qui sont vendu à profit, et ensuite, l’institution étatique extrait des taxes qui sont dédiées à la redistribution sociale et à la protection écologique. Mais sur les deux fronts, il y a eu régression et en plus, le reste du monde est en révolte contre l'hégémonie de l’occident. Graduellement, la plus-value qui affluait vers l’Occident diminuent et les moyens locaux s'appauvrissent dans une Europe et une France qui se sont désindustrialisées depuis des décennies.
Mais que faire, car  critiquer un système est bien plus facile que de le remplacer!


Heureusement, l’histoire nous montre que les changements de valeur ne sont pas du tout exceptionnels, mais bien plutôt la règle. Et pour comprendre la transition en cours, il faut surtout savoir bien regarder les nouvelles formes qui représentent un futur possible.
Voici deux tendances fortes qui influencent déjà ce futur possible.

Le premier est la dynamique ‘pair a pair’: il s’agit surtout de possibilité technologique de mettre en échelle la collaboration et la coordination humaine. Le pair à pair c’est la capacité d’auto-organisation ‘cosmo-locale’, c.a.d. qui combine aussi bien les collaborations locales, ancrées dans les territoires, mais aussi les collaborations trans-locales, par le biais du numérique. 


La vision que je défend, avec mes collaborateurs de la Fondation P2P, et qui est basé sur 20 ans d’observations des pratiques innovantes de communauté pionnière, est une combinaison de deux facteurs:

* Localement, c’est la pratique du biorégionalisme régénératif, c.a.d. La collaboration et la coordination de tous les efforts pour régénérer une région, un territoire particulier.

* Trans-localement, c’est la coordination de communauté de praticiens qui s’engage dans des pratiques similaires, dans le monde entier, afin d'apprendre ensemble et de mutualiser les moyens.


En gros, le cosmo-localisme propose donc un nouveau régime de valeur, ou tout ce qui est lourd est local, et tout ce qui est léger est global et partagé. On combine donc une relocalisation relative de la production humaine et une collaboration numérique transnationale. Ce régime de valeur est ‘contributif’, c.a.d. Il reconnaît non seulement les valeurs des marchandises, mais les valeurs de toutes les contributions, aussi bien positives (du point de vue social et écologique), mais aussi ‘négatif’, c.a.d. La reconnaissance des impacts négatifs. Sans entrer dans le détail dans cette courte introduction, disons simplement que l’outillage est déjà bien en place. Tous ces changements sont donc liés à la dynamique ‘pair à pair'.

Mais la deuxième forme qui brandit son chemin c'est la pratique et l’institution du commun!


Les communs ont toujours existé et ont été central à toutes les formes sociétales historiques mais ont malheureusement été occultés dans la modernité. Dans les sociétés indigènes, communautaires, mais même monarchiques et impériales, les communs ont été soit l’institution primordiale, soit une institution équilibrante, le pendant de la compétition extractive des forces marchandes et étatiques. Les communs c'étaient les ressources partagées des communautés locales, gérées collectivement par les villageois et les paroissiens. C'était l’institution qui préservent et régénèrent les sols et les ressources. 


Pour faire simple, les communs de définissent par trois critères:

La ressource partagée, qui peut être physiques ou ‘immatérielles’

Une communauté qui la crée , la maintien ou la défend

Des règles de gouvernance qui proviennent de la communauté elle-même.


Les pâturages partagées du moyen age, les accords entre pêcheurs au Sénégal, les flancs de montagne en Suisse, Autriche et au Japon, tout cela sont des communs, mais aussi les mutuelles de la classe ouvrière (avant qu’elle soit étatique par l’Etat Providence), et aujourd’hui, les communs numérique, comme le logiciel libre. Notons que dans le passé, ces communs était effectivement ‘local’, mais qu’aujourd’hui les communs numériques peuvent être translocaux.

Ce dernier lien nous renvoie au cosmo-localisme que nous avons expliqué auparavant.

Enfin, tout comme les monastères, qui étaient des institutions collectives dans le passé, des lieux physiques ‘en commun’ sont tout aussi nécessaires. Et ceci nous renvoie justement au rôle joué par les tiers-lieux.

Des tiers-lieux qui peuvent être vu comme des communs ‘physiques’ ancrés dans le territoire, mais tout aussi bien comme des lieux ‘phygitals’’, c.a.d. des lieux qui mettent en lien le local et le trans-local, le physique ET le numérique.

La géopolitique globale peut être vu comme une compétition entre un modèle occidentale en déclin relatif, ou le marché prime sur l'État depuis l'ère du néolibéralisme, et les coalitions des BRICS, qui sous l'impulsion de la Russie et la Chine, privilégie un développement ‘étato-centrique’, ou l’Etat prime sur le marché.

Mais le cosmo-localisme présente une troisième voie: un archipel de villages ou de projets régénératif, qui collaborent dans le monde entier, et bâtissent des communautés centre autour de leur commun collaboratif, local et trans-locale. C’est une nouvelle synthèse entre la société humaine, les nécessités sociales et écologiques, et les capacités techniques de mise en échelle des collaborations humaines qui peuvent collaborer avec des forces marchandes et étatiques, mais peuvent aussi travailler à leur propre autonomie.

In fine, les tiers-lieux ont vocation à renouveler de fond en comble l’appareil productif, en commençant dans un territoire mais sans y être figé dans une splendide isolation. La connaissance du monde entier est ainsi mise à disposition de la population locale.


'''Pour en savoir plus:'''


# Les ecrits de Michel Bauwens, https://4thgenerationcivilization.substack.com/
# La documentation sur les pratiques pair à pair, en France et ailleurs, https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/

[[Category:Michel_Bauwens]]