==[[Towards the Data Governance of Market Systems]]==

'''"From market and design rules to data rules"'''

George Anadiotis:

"The book ([[Data Rules]], Kallinikos noted, '''aims to establish a third point of view to the analysis of socioeconomic systems'''. Traditionally, the main lens for such analysis has been the “standard economics discourse” – markets, competition, prices and so on. Another lens that Kallinikos referred to is the so-called Design Rules, introduced by the eponymous book by Carliss Baldwin and Kim Clark.

In “Design Rules”, Baldwin and Clark argue that technology shapes markets and how the economy performs not just in terms of its direct economic performance, but also in terms of how it forces divisions and creates ecosystems.

In “Data Rules”, Kallinikos and Alaimo present their evidence to claim there is a third system of rules that have to do with how data is generated, its availability and accessibility, and the terms under which these takes place.

The concept of interoperability is a relevant starting point for this conversation. For example, technical interoperability such as the one imposed in the EU for mobile phone equipment can have direct consequences in the respective ecosystems.

For data, interoperability in the form of standards and protocols is an enabling layer. And it’s no accident that interoperability is actively sabotaged by platforms wishing to strengthen their position by means of user lock-in.

However, Kallinikos argues, '''what really matters is commensurability. [[Commensurability]] is the term “Data Rules” uses to describe what Kallinikos referred to as “porous channels of interaction between people’s private lives, domestic lives, intimate even lives, and the world”. This is how the book concludes, ''emphasizing the potential of data to bring worlds together''.'''

This is an aspect of the function of data which may be obvious to most data professionals, and usually seen as a good thing. But that may not necessarily be the case for the general public. It’s worth considering this as the key takeaway from “Data Rules”."

(https://linkeddataorchestration.com/2024/07/01/data-rules-from-interoperability-to-commensurability/)

[[Category:Big_Data]]
[[Category:P2P_Market_Approaches]]
[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]
[[Category:Articles]]