
'''* Book: TOWARDS A NEW CULTURE. FROM REFUSAL TO RE-CREATION. OUTLINE OF AN ECOLOGICAL AND HUMANE ALTERNATIVE. By Dieter Duhm. Meiga,''' 

URL = http://www.towards-a-new-culture.org/ [http://www.towards-a-new-culture.org/uploads/media/Towards_a_New_Culture__free_download_.pdf pdf]


=Contents=

==1 INTRODUCTION==

Established Insanity 9

The Timeliness of the Concrete Utopia 10

Cultural Centres for New Basic Experiences 13

A New Consciousness of the Living 14

Overcoming Fear 17

Humaneness 18

The Bankruptcy and Rediscovery of Geist 21


==2 THE EXISTENTIAL QUESTION==

Behind the Ideological Façades 25

Wanderers in the Desert 26

A Different View of Suffering and Its Consequences 32


==3 THE TRUTH OF THE LIVING==

Fear as A Biological Disease of Culture 40

Life Research as the Science of the Future 41

Contact and Truth 43

The Technological Wonderland of the Living 44

The human in the Entire Organism of Nature 46

Functional Principles of the Living 48

A New Mental-Spiritual Attitude 53


==4 BIOLOGICAL HUMANISM AS THE FRAMEWORK FOR A NEW CULTURE==

The Concept of Biological Humanism 55

Three Steps towards a Realistic Humanism 58

An Ecological Relationship to all Living Beings 63

The Idea of Science 66

Evolution and Growing Freedom 68

A Culture without Sexual Repression 71

The Meaning of Sexuality 75

A New Social Organisation of Sexuality 80

The Question of Non-Violence 86

The Question of Democracy 90

Building a Humanely Functioning Community 95

Emotional Cleansing and Dissolving the Character Armour 98


==5 POSTSCRIPT==

Concerning Tradition 102

That All This Does Not Remain Mere Words 


=Summary=

==PUBLISHER’S FOREWORD==

Monica Berghoff:

"How will life go on after the collapse of the globalised political
and economic systems? How will it survive the large-scale disruption
of our planet’s ecological and climatic systems? And
what will become of the immense systems of belief, love and
thinking as they start to shake within?

The answer to these questions has to persist in the face of
so many failed attempts in the past. The world stands on the
brink of an abyss.

The youth from Cairo to London, from Greece to Chile,
from Rothschild Avenue, Tel Aviv to Wall Street, New York are
looking for new ways out of the crisis. If the mass protest and
revolt movements rising up all over the world today intend to
combine their revolutionary power and take off together, if life
is to win over violence and war, we need a direction, an image,
an idea of what might be our common goal.

This book offers an idea of how a future worth living could
be. It was written and published more than thirty years ago in
Germany and we believe that its time has now come. We left it
in the political context in which it was written. Through this
we want to show that names change, yet the underlying problems
remain the same … until we discover how to solve them.
How this can be achieved is what this book is all about. It is
more relevant today than ever.

The author, Dieter Duhm, has given a voice to life itself here.
He has tracked it behind false morals and dogma, and has
opened up ways for it through the walls and armour surrounding
heart and mind that we all needed in order to survive
an epoch hostile to life under patriarchal rule.
But all this could be over now.

The system change that is taking place today, is the most
profound and fundamental that has happened in thousands 
of years. It is a change from the power to destroy life to the
power to care for and protect life. This is the only way for this
planet Earth and all its inhabitants, including the human being,
to have a chance for a future.

We wish for this book to meet open ears and hearts, and
that its seeds of humaneness and compassion will bear fruits
worldwide.

This is more than a book. It is an idea of how a future worth
living could be. The author has taken himself at his word and
set out together with comrades and friends to put this idea for
the future into practice. The new edition – published for the
first time in English – includes an appendix section that shows
in brief, what now has resulted after thirty years of pioneering
work. A dream is becoming reality …

May this undertaking succeed, because “if life wins, there will
be no losers”


=Excerpts=

== BIOLOGICAL HUMANISM AS THE FRAMEWORK FOR A NEW CULTURE==

THE CONCEPT OF BIOLOGICAL HUMANISM, Dieter Duhm:

"Throughout history attempts to improve the world with morality
and religion and to conquer man’s savagery by appeals
to reason and conscience have failed. Men are humane to the
degree that they recognise and fulfil their bodily, emotional,
and spiritual needs in a social way (that is, in living together
with others). The philosophy of the new culture does not appeal
to any morals but to the deepest and most conscious “egoism”.

The necessary cultural change will not come through appeals
or sacrifices but by changing our life practice, our way of
working, our human contacts, our sexuality, and so forth, in
a way that fulfils our needs. A new cultural concept can only
be realistic to the extent that it presents a model for a better
and truer self-realisation and fulfils a greater number of basic
needs.

A culture based on true needs would, of itself, have a great
ecological advantage. A community with loving communication,
fulfilled sexuality, and creative work would no longer be
dependent on vicarious satisfaction through the products of
industrial society, as is the case today. It could, therefore, develop
a new consumer model that would avoid wasting goods,
energy, and other resources, thus saving the environment from
destruction. The new consumer model needed by the ecological
society of the future, is first and foremost, a new model of
human self-realisation.

Humanism is a spiritual impulse towards liberation that
entered history in the early Renaissance and has persisted
through the eras of humanism, enlightenment, science, Marxism,
and psychoanalysis. Slowly man begins to see the world
as something to be observed, grasped, analysed, and changed. 

He frees himself from the old order based on authority, religion,
and society, and on taking the reality of a situation for
granted. By constantly using his own reason to enter into new
realms, he creates the necessity to re-organise and re-form his
world. This is the essence of the genuine humanistic tradition:
to wrest control from formidable old power structures in order
that the human steps into self-management and responsibility.
On this historic path to autonomy, humanity can tolerate
no pre-ordained limits and no moral ones, for it follows
evolutionary laws of development. Morals themselves become
the object of analysis and change. Nietzsche, so far, dealt most
consistently with these matters. Through Copernicus the power
of thought entered into the religious world-view; through
Marx it broke into the bourgeoisie; through Nietzsche it broke
into the moral world-view; and through Freud it entered into
sexuality. Every new breakthrough opened a new dimension
in human social life that needed to be dealt with, assimilated,
and integrated.

The dimension that now needs to be discovered and integrated
is the dimension of life itself with its special principles
of holistic and ecstatic ways of functioning (see previous chapter).
The forgotten biological basis in which all control mechanisms
are embedded must be laid open. The organic system of
body and soul with its drives and emotions (that has an evolutionary
and therefore historically changeable character) must
regain its natural ways of functioning. We can only break the
alienation of our age by reconnecting the human forms of action
and development to the universal processes of the living
world.

Biological humanism strives for the maximum integration of
the human social world into the overall realm of living nature
(I do not know whether there is also “dead” nature or whether
what is called dead is in reality only a special case of the living
world). Such an integration will realise the ideas of “organic 
environmental design”, like that developed by Hugo Kükelhaus,
and will also achieve a fundamental reorientation of
man in relation to his own nature. The nature of man consists
not only of his anatomy and his physiological processes – here
we share Teilhard de Chardin’s concepts of nature – but also of
all his emotions, drives, instincts, and energies.
One of the central inner drives of the human is the sexual
drive. In this area there is a common denominator running
through almost all cultures, religions, morals, philosophies,
and political ideologies of the Occidental world, and that is
the secret or admitted capitulation in front of Eros. Show an
upstanding theorist a picture of a well-proportioned female
with an inviting cleavage and he grows pale. If the destiny of
the Earth and our culture is to be put in the hands of adults
then these must be people who have free access to their erotic
powers without suppression. This is the only way that the living
world can be “controlled”.

The same evolutionary lines of development, instincts, and
drives that are present in the animal realm come together in
humans at a higher level. Becoming human is, in its most farreaching
sense, a progressive spiritualisation and sublimation
of all animalistic forces into a human culture. This process of
sublimating has not yet succeeded because instead of accepting,
cultivating and refining his animalistic strengths, man
has tried to suppress and ignore them. We can perhaps see it
as the “basic error” in the course of the history of consciousness
that the process of cultivating the human animal was
carried out as a battle of the spirit against the “beast in man”
instead of through the union and reconciliation of the two.
It was a fight against nature itself, which naturally could not
be won. Instead of a sublimation of the whole human with all
his drives, a dangerous split occurred, into an official and a
repressed part that has so far obstinately resisted all attempts
at humanisation. In this psychological ambiguity of the human 
lies the principal illness of our age. The conscious exposure and
reintegration of repressed material and the “acceptance of the
shadow”, which C.G. Jung formulated as a therapeutic principle,
must be taken from the therapeutic level to the social and
cultural levels, if man is to become whole again.

The human must become a conscious fellow creature on
Earth, if not, he will senselessly destroy it. He can only achieve
this if he accepts the authority of life and submits to it. Humanisation
is the humanifying of the Earth, the penetration
of the human into deeper and higher realms. But this penetration
means mental-spiritual transformation resulting in a non-imperialistic
domination. There is a law of the living world
that only allows spiritual expansion through spiritual transformation.

We cannot control natural forces by fighting and
conquering them – through that their unpredictable nature
runs out of control and leads to earthquakes and floods, also
on the soul level. Seen in this light, the history of our culture
has largely been a puppet theatre, directed by the strings of the
repressed, “conquered” natural forces and life energies. If one
seeks control in the living world one must unite with it, get to
know its rules, and follow them. It is a totally new kind of control,
no longer dependent on contest and suppression, but on
ecological harmony."
(http://www.towards-a-new-culture.org/uploads/media/Towards_a_New_Culture__free_download_.pdf)


==The secularization of salvation==

Dieter Duhm:

"The emergence of a new culture contains in some sense a
theme of political theology. A political or rather a societal
concept needs to be developed that, in its depth and existential
meaning for the individual, is equivalent to the religious
ideas of the past. What were once steps towards inner individual
transformation are now steps towards a metamorphosis
of the social fabric in which we live. In this social fabric – in
our work, our social institutions, and our human relations – 
we must one day be able to occupy and truly know ourselves
to such an extent that we need no other comfort and no other
home outside it.

At some point in the development of man, the human mind
deemed it necessary to go against the body and its sensual
needs. Cultural development thereby took a path that led the
human away from the entire organism of nature, to which he
wholly belongs. Since then, history has resembled a dance
around an unknown centre.


'''I.'''

Religions have tried to uphold a vision of a better afterlife
to compensate for earthly misery. Salvation lay in freeing the
soul already here on Earth as much as possible from the physical
world, for it was identical with sin, a prison, or maya. The
goal was thus to conquer the body, to conquer sensuality, and
to conquer earthly misery through mental-spiritual exercise.
We find this fundamental idea in all the religious leaders of
the past, from Buddha to Aurobindo, Plato to Rudolf Steiner,
and from St. Paul to Pope John II. The idea was by no means
a false one. Since the soul is truly an independent entity that
can actually free itself from the body (as has been done, for
example, by old cults of initiation, in religious ecstasy, in LSDexperiments,
in peak experiences or in near-death situations),
this healing concept was realistic. But it led the healing interest
away from everyday life on Earth and away from earthly human
longing. The atrocities on Earth continued unabated.


'''II.'''

Next to the religious impulse towards liberation, we find the
political one, a much later phenomenon that is still today in
its early stages. It has so far found its most unequivocal philosophical
formulation in Marxism. Marx’s epoch-making
idea was to annul (and redeem) religious ideas of liberation
through political practice (the class struggle). Salvation was no
longer to be erected in heaven, but in the most materialistic 
point in the physical world: in material production. “The criticism
of religion” said Marx, “ends with the teaching that man
is the highest being for mankind, that is, with the categorical
imperative to overthrow all conditions in which the human is
a degraded, enslaved, abandoned, and contemptible being.”

By creating a new order for human labour without class
domination and alienation man was expected to find his centre
and home in his everyday social practice. This mutational
leap in the history of ideas was the most revolutionary feat so
far achieved by the human Prometheus. It acts as a signpost
from which there is no road back. But Marxism was not yet
capable of thinking and formulating its idea of political selfliberation
at a deep enough level. Its political-economic theories
did not truly offer a full equivalent to the religious ideas
of salvation: the human had not yet been fathomed deeply
enough, his alienation and ultimate longing not yet understood
deeply enough.



'''III.'''

The next fundamental impulse towards a secularisation of salvation,
as profound and as worldly as the Marxist approach
but arising from an entirely different point, came through psychoanalysis
(we leave Nietzsche aside, who is not so easy to fit
in here, and whose work had almost no social impact, because
a discreet understanding of his “heroic philosophy” will probably
be grasped by later generations). Owing to its authentic
humane motive, psychoanalysis was first of all an act of honesty.
The puritan Sigmund Freud recognised in himself the
overkill of sexual impulses present in the hypocritical culture
of the Victorian era. He immediately saw the cultural universality
of this situation. He noticed that here, in the libidinous
realm, matters of happiness and misery were determined in an
area that lay entirely outside official consciousness. He thereby
pulled the question of salvation from the afterlife into the
“basest” aspects of life on Earth, namely into the domain of 
sexuality. But, as with Marx’s work, sexuality turned out to
be in a condition of utmost misery and perversion, as it had
for so long led a repressed, insulted, exploited, and hypocritical
existence. Freud recognised that the moralistic sexual barriers
and sexual structure of the family led adults to live in
deep captivity of the soul in a world of subconscious drives
and fears, constructed from projections, fixations, and unfulfilled
fantasies. He knew that this psychic underground would
have to be redressed, if man ever wanted to be free.

Freud’s discoveries could have contained the seeds for a
prodigious cultural revolution, had he not stopped it himself
through his faint-hearted theory of culture and sublimation.
In the struggle between needs and society, he finally came
down on the side of society, presumably to save his societal
position. We are entitled to view that as a barrier of his time
and to pursue those unfinished truths beyond this barrier.


'''IV.'''

The next great pioneer who drew back the veil still further was
Freud’s successor, Wilhelm Reich. An unusual path of discovery
led Reich to realise the identity of sexual energy and universal
life energy. In the sexual orgasm he found the prototype
and the key to an understanding of fundamental biological
functions in all body tissue. In processes such as pulsation,
peristalsis, tension and release, charge and discharge, and contraction
and expansion, he saw the fundamental activity and
functions of life energy itself. These modes of functioning are
of a universal nature, that is, they are a part of the universal
order of life. But in our culture’s human they are considerably
disturbed through inner blocks and congestion, obstructions
caused by society and morality. Reich termed this “body armour”.
This discovery of a universal order of life in the dynamic
realm of drives and urges made way for a new vision of liberation.

It consisted of a conscious reunion of the human with 
his most elementary functions of life. The possibility of salvation
that Reich found here he called simply health. If the fundamental
biological functions can flow freely then the organism,
including its aspects of soul and spirit, is connected with
the universal order of life and is healthy at its core. But if they
are blocked and disturbed, then the organism is disconnected
from the universal order of life and is sick at its core. Correspondingly,
a society in which the biological currents of energy
can flow freely is healthy at its core; a society where they are
blocked is sick.

To base healing on the free flow of life energies in the human
organism – would that be too one-sided, too narrow, too
“biological” a concept? Perhaps. But let us never forget that
“biological” does not refer only to what the mechanistic view
of nature in the materialistic era has limited it to. In the unsolvable
context of Bios and Psyche, life energies are also always
of a soul and spiritual nature. Correspondingly, the mode of
experiencing the world that spontaneously arises in a fearless
and freely flowing organism is of a specific soul and spiritual
nature. The world becomes alive. The landscape that I see is no
longer purely an image, it is part of creation. One realises that
being alive means taking part in creation. It is like an elementary
encounter with the world. It leads to new and more intense
perceptions, of sight, touch, taste, and smell, a new way
of walking and of putting one’s foot on the ground. One suddenly
understands animals, their elasticity and calm, their way
of pointing their ears, and the power in their readiness to leap.

The organism becomes impressively strong, light, and transparent,
almost musical. In this experience and mode of being
there is an element of animal vitality, of soft power, and also an
element of intensity and celebration that points towards a new
sensual and vital kind of sacred perception. It is the religiosity
of universal love that now flows by itself from its biological
sources. Reich’s descriptions show that he knew this state. To 
him it was simply the autonomous functioning of life in the
unarmoured human.

Reich’s advances into the realm of life were a pioneering feat
that cannot be overlooked if we today want to lay a realistic
foundation for a new culture. Marx’s great political thought, to
cast off all conditions through which the human is demeaned,
could now be thought through radically to its conclusion. All
conditions means the working conditions and the psychicenergetic-biological
conditions in emotional and sexual human
relations. A remodelling is needed both in the organisation
our working life and in the organisation of our love life!

The entire libidinous and intimate emotional texture of human
society must be able to develop anew without restriction and
prohibition, without fear and compulsion towards emotional
lying. The ecological movement was the first political group
to make life itself and the protection of life its main political
theme. In this context Reich’s thoughts need to be updated.

Today it is not possible to realise an ecological humanism
without taking into consideration bio-energetic and sexual-psychological
interrelations."
(http://www.towards-a-new-culture.org/uploads/media/Towards_a_New_Culture__free_download_.pdf)



==Freedom within evolution==

Dieter Duhm:

"EVOLUTION AND GROWING FREEDOM

The idea of evolution is that the totality of life on Earth is in a
constant process of becoming. From the first cell to the human
being of today there is a continuous line of development. The
history of the human is the youngest episode in the history of
evolutionary life and is itself a part of natural history.

The concept of freedom in evolution is the idea that the
combinations that life has chosen in the process of its evolving
did not simply follow a mechanistic determination or the
laws of chance. Rather there was at the core of the living being
something that could use chance, picking and choosing
among the results of chance. For this we must assume a rudimentary
proto-consciousness that from the beginning has
directed life from within. This proto-consciousness, acting as
the “impetus of the world” (Teilhard de Chardin), picked its
way from possibility to possibility, from life form to life form,
from species to species. This means that living matter (and
probably all matter, considering the continuity involved) has
a hidden centre that in the course of evolution is expanding
in the direction of growing spontaneity and autonomy up to
the freedom of will that we find in the human. It may be that
the essence of evolution is nothing more than the development
of this hidden centre now slowly being unveiled in the
human. Essentially then, evolution is an attempt to realise ever
more freedom within the medium of the material world. (Teilhard
de Chardin has brought together impressive facts and 
thoughts on this evolutionary perspective in his book Man
and Cosmos.)

This is not the place to expound on the metaphysics of
evolution or to try to answer questions we are only just beginning
to formulate. We are living – and this fact suffices for
us to recognise directly the two qualities of development and
freedom. Since we cannot believe that the miracle “Man” at a
random moment in time was suddenly planted on Earth, we
assume that these two qualities belong to the history of life
and are inherently prepared within it. We assume that today’s
human is also a preparation, a phase in a total process whose
goal and end we do not know. From this attitude stems our
reluctance to make a definitive statement concerning the development
of modern humankind with all its blind alleys and
delusions. It may be that all this insanity was necessary to prepare
for a higher form of consciousness. How can we know
what the universe has in store for us!

Our thoughts about evolution do not simply constitute a private
philosophical pleasure. They have decisive consequences
for the way we imagine a desirable future. The fact that the
ideas of a “New Age” often go hand in hand with the image
of an egalitarian farming society and a simple nature-oriented
life, free of technology, only shows that the eyes of most seekers
today are directed not towards the future but towards the
past. The evolution of life, which has achieved its most contradictory
and enigmatic manifestation in the human, does not
allow for a simple move back to nature or flight away from the
tasks that our cultural era is currently failing to come to grips
with. Instead we need to recognise the increasingly discernible
primary direction that evolution takes – in terms of growing
complexity, consciousness, and freedom – to rebuild and cultivate
the Earth, utilising to the utmost our historical experience,
scientific knowledge, and technical abilities.

The human being is at the forefront of consciousness as life
evolves. He has no choice but to take increasingly conscious
control of the direction that evolution is taking. This requires
us to know or get to know the basic processes, tendencies,
and operating principles of the living world and its evolution.
This implies research, learning to see, that is, acquiring an attitude
that enables us to see, in the sense used by Nietzsche and
Teilhard de Chardin, and also by Kükelhaus. Wanting to lead
a creative life today implies being aware of a goal. To set and
realise goals with the help of our power of thinking does not
originate from human hubris but is rather a human expression
of the nature of will immanent in the Living. The freedom
contained here has led to a constant shattering of energies. It
is not until realistic goals, in evolutionary terms, are seen and
understood that decisions can be made to join forces in rebuilding
the Earth.

In the continuity that lies behind us through aeons of time,
life developed from the formation of the Earth, and out of that
life the human emerged. Geogenesis – biogenesis – anthropogenesis
– these three developments constitute the direction of
evolution to date. 


The world in which all this took place is described
by Teilhard de Chardin as follows:

“In order to give birth to us it has, from its primeval beginnings,
played in a miraculous way with so many improbabilities
that there is not the slightest danger for us if we continue
to put our trust in its guidance to the end of time. If it has taken
on the task it will also be able to bring it to completion,
using the same methods and the same infallibility as it has up
till now.”

Taking charge, and still trusting in something greater than
ourselves – that is the logic of the behaviour that has emerged
for us as a result of contemplating evolution."



==Democracy needs mature individuals==

Dieter Duhm:

"Democracy is a question neither of
verbal commitment nor of the outer political form of a system.
Rather it is a question mainly of the emotional state and
structure of drives in the human. Unfulfilled libidinous needs
still stand fundamentally in the way of a free and democratic
society. The emotional structure of today’s human is not democratic
and autonomous, but rather feudalistic. Just as in old
times he longs for Father, God, and Caesar; but he does not
want them in the old form, he wants a psychological equivalent
for them. As long as no deliverer is in sight he does not
recognise his inclinations and speaks of anything, such as
democracy or even anarchy. But as soon as such a god-like 
father-figure becomes visible, he starts to come alive and forgets
everything he preached the day before. I have often seen
critical intellectuals, Marxists, ponderers and individualists arrive
at the extremely hierarchically organised Friedrichshof in
Austria and in very little time cease their resistance – not because
they were broken down through brainwashing, as a sensationalist
newspaper depicted it – but because they could no
longer believe in their own resistance. Their true desires had
been awakened. Here I remind the reader of the example of
the two wanderers who went thirstily through the desert …
Some readers may now understand me when I state quite
simply that our culture of today, including our counterculture,
is a pseudo culture. At the verbal level hardly anyone
is credible any more, for people want something different
from what they say. People are thirsty, but hardly anyone dares
to say what for. The communities of AAO and Poona have
brought this thirst out into the open, and what they teach us
should be taken seriously. The political slogans of democracy,
peace, and justice sound like Salvation Army hymns when
compared to real life, as long as their psychological roots are
not reflected upon deeply, down to the dynamics of their underlying
drives and their emotional core, and realised from
there.

True humanism needs democracy. All guru structures, all adoration
of a leader, and all forms of organisation of human
communities that are based on emotional fixation may be an
important temporary learning phase for those involved, but
they do not answer the question that we are faced with. That
question is: what organisational form and inner constitution
can we create for living together that can be applied generally
and, in the long term, make humane structures possible?

Truly responsible humaneness can come into existence
only after the fixations are overcome and the time has arrived 
when democracy is psychologically possible. The development
of real democracy will be based on the reality at hand, for
example, on the fact that in every community there is a kind
of natural hierarchy (which can always change itself). Before
the community can give itself a conscious form of organisation,
some sort of group structure will already have evolved
through the hierarchy of perceived human differences. These
differences are a part of the variety of human biotope. They
must not be suppressed through an overlay of egalitarian
claims but rather should be used for creative learning processes.

Grass-roots and group democracy that reflects the Living is
not based on egalitarian structures but on the optimum possibilities
for individual development and growth in the intellectual
autonomy of all members. These are high terms. 


They require the realisation of three things in the democratic society
of the future:

* Firstly, the child-parent fixation – which so far has held people
in lifelong childish dependency on authorities – must be overcome
through new social forms of raising children and new
social forms of love.

* Secondly, all emotional repression - which so far has stopped
the emotional development of the human at an early stage and
thus prevented him from growing up - must cease through a
social system of free love, free research, and free work.

* Thirdly, the greatest possible social transparency needs to be
created (allowing the individual, from childhood on, to have
an overview of his social environment, to know his present
position in the community, and take part in current decisions).
The next section considers some principles for achieving
this social transparency.

Democracy cannot be achieved by fiat. It can only emerge and
grow when the necessary emotional, mental, and social conditions are there. As it grows gradually and slowly, the community
in which it develops will take the form of a circle. A circle
where each element carries a different weight and is of different
meaning but has its place and its relation to the whole."


==The need for transparency in social relationships and real hierarchies==

Dieter Duhm:

"Building a humane community usually means confronting
difficulties that are deeply rooted in the character structures
of modern man and especially in the ideological structures of
the subcultures. Instead of the fixation on humanitarian slogans
and demands, what is needed is a clear attitude towards
the emotional and mental realities that in fact exist. This emotional
reality must at all times and places be made visible, with
as playful and joyful methods as possible, until all pretence
and hypocrisy drop away. The group members must notice
that there is no longer anything to be gained by pretending.

There is perhaps only one categorical imperative for the emergence
of communities that are good and stable from within:
that everything possible be done to make what happens in the
community understandable and transparent to everyone. This
is especially important for the emotional and sexual processes,
for they are behind almost everything that makes the group
situation difficult and opaque. The transparency of all processes
is the precondition for freeing the members of their paranoia,
for keeping destructive processes from taking on a life of
their own, and for treating the causes of rifts and fractures in
the group before it is too late.

A crucial part of overall transparency is the transparency
of social hierarchies, which exist in every group. It is good if
everyone knows as precisely as possible his place in the group,
what the others think about him, and where they see him in
the hierarchy of the community. In this way the community is
freed from the hypocrisy of superficial harmony and false democracy.
Each individual can then get to know the reality he
has to deal with. It is no longer easy for him to inhabit a world
of secret claims and blackmail in which he used to be able to
blame others for his weaknesses. Now he knows his place and
can work from there.

Ongoing social feedback between the members of the community
is also part of transparency. The members must learn 
to tell each other without hesitation what they like and don’t
like. Personal conflicts must not be suppressed or they will
seethe under the surface, poison the atmosphere and lead to
camouflaged reactions that cannot be read clearly. More serious
personal conflicts should be presented publicly to the
group. To avoid taking it all too seriously, those involved
should learn to distance themselves from the problem through
playful methods (such as psychodrama or the methods of selfexpression
developed in Friedrichshof). Conflict often turns
out to be a part of one’s own insanity, which in itself justifies
perceiving and presenting it as a stage play rather than as a too
serious reality. (To learn to play the games of group dynamics
it is wise at the beginning to enlist experienced “neutral” therapists
to teach the methods and something of the processes
involved.)

A common cause for the lack of transparency in a group
situation lies in the mixing of factual discussions with emotional
conflicts. The group must learn to distinguish sharply
between them to keep discussions from sinking into an aggressive
quagmire. There is no point in continuing a factual
discussion that has long since become dominated by personal
conflicts, covert power struggles or some old story of competition.

This is the time to break off the discussion and carry on
the interaction through play-acting with theatrical exaggeration
and playfulness."


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]