
'''* Book: Towards peer production in public services: Cases from Finland. Editors: [[Andrea Botero]], [[Andrew Paterson]] and Joanna Saad-Sulonen. Aalto University publication series Crossover 15/2012. Helsinki, Finland'''

URL = http://co-p2p.mlog.taik.fi/book-2012/


=Description=

eds. Andrea Botero, Andrew Gryf Paterson and Joanna Saad-Sulonen:

"This book is a collection of articles that deal broadly with the relationships between peer-to-peer dynamics, and public services. Most of the cases presented are illustrative of recent developments and discussions in Finnish society, however, also included are broader international perspectives, giving historical reflection and future-oriented speculation on how peer production might affect the structures of our society. Of particular interest is the role of Internet and new media in making these developments visible and scalable."

(http://co-p2p.mlog.taik.fi/book-2012/)

.


”There are many challenges  and opportunities in designing, developing and maintaining services for participatory modes of governance, not to mention their co-creation and peer-to-peer aspects. We ask what can be learned from current research, and what is happening already beyond academia? With the aim to increase the opportunities for dialogue between the Finnish scene and the international context, we gather this collection of articles that deal broadly with the relationships between peer-to-peer dynamics, and public services.”

(http://snuproject.wordpress.com/2012/06/03/book-releasetowards-peer-production-in-public-services-cases-from-finland/)

=Contents=

* 6 Introduction
Andrea Botero (CO/FI), Andrew Gryf Paterson (SCO/FI),
and Joanna Saad-Sulonen (LB/FI), Aalto ARTS, Dept. Media, Helsinki

* 13 Innovations in Public Services: Co-Production
and New Public Governance in Europe
Victor Pestoff (SE), Institute for Civil Society Studies,
Ersta Skondal University College, Stockholm

* 34 Evolving towards a Partner State in an Ethical Economy
Michel Bauwens (BE/TH), Foundation for Peer-to-peer Alternatives, Chiang Mai

* 50 Towards p2p learning: What media and whose peer?
Teemu Leinonen (FI), Aalto ARTS, Dept. Media, Helsinki

* 62 Tiny social movements: Experiences
of social media based co-creation
Pauliina Seppälä (FI), Independent, Helsinki

* 76 Learning peer-to-peer practices step-by-step:
3 cases from suburban Helsinki neighborhoods
Pirjo Tulikukka (FI), Helsinki Neighbourhood Association /
Helsingin kaupunginosayhdistykset ry Helka, Helsinki

* 89 From margin to margin: Peer-based public services
in the addiction treatment field
Tuukka Tammi (FI), Tiia Ruokosalo (FI) and Henna Vuorento (FI),
A-Clinic Foundation / A-klinikkasäätiö, Helsinki

* 101 Time banking: Building the commons,
towards a solidarity economy
Ruby van der Wekken (NL/FI), Helsinki Timebank / Stadin aikapankki, Helsinki

* 109 Institutional impacts of the collaborative service
creation: Case of virtual home care in Helsinki
Petra Turkama (FI), Jukka Mattila (FI), Aalto ECON,
Centre for Knowledge and Innovation Research, Helsinki

* 125 Appendix: Co-creation, co-governance and peer-to-peer production of
public services – Seminar Report
Anna Keune (DE/FI), Aalto ARTS, Dept. Media, Helsinki


"We start our journey with three contextualizing
articles that discuss and
envision some of these developments in
broader theoretical terms. The first contribution
from Victor Pestoff offers an
account of co-production as an important
element in the renewal of public services
in Europe. In discussing this he clarifies
some of the vocabulary associated with
these developments. He does that in terms
of co-production–to exemplify the relationships
between the parties involved – 
and their motivations for engaging in such
efforts, aswell as the political and policy
implications they entail. Using empirical
materials from two dfferent case studies
of parent-participation in pre-school services,
Pestoff argues that co-production
has important implications for the development
of participatory forms of governance,
and the important role public policy
plays in crowding in or out these developments.  

The next piece from Michel Bauwens is
more speculative in character. He explores
some of the politics of new forms of valuecreation,
refered to as commons-oriented
peer-production, that have been made
visible, for example, in the software industry.
This is done to highlight what can
be learned from them on a more general
level of social organization. His proposition
is to compare the role of for-benefit
institutions–which take care of the infrastructure
of common projects–to the role
the state could play in the future, in this
case, to provide protection to the common
good and infrastructure, not simply of it’s
projects, but those of it’s citizens. Bauwens
believes that such a model for a partner
state could transcend and include the
best parts of the welfare model currently
in crisis; provided that we are also willing
to look seriously into other aspects of the
model beyond infrastructure. For example,
he highlights the development of new
‘economies of scope’ to contrast with the
old and tired mottos of ‘economy of scale’.
In elaborating his argument he provides
also a historical comparison to the times
when feudalism was made irrelevant in
Europe, to give precendece to the ways in
which contemorary developments might
prefigure the irrelevance of the capitalist
mode.

Meanwhile, Teemu Leinonen, in his
article, inquires on the qualities of different
media when it comes to providing
peer-to-peer learning opportunities, and
how we might conceptualize who are
our peers when doing so. To ilustrate his
point, three different examples are used,
ranging from the assemblies devised
by students occupying a high school in
Santiago de Chile, the online computers
used to create self organized class rooms
in India, and finally the different social
media services used to create complex
massive open online courses. The three
cases highlight important possibilitites of
peer-to-peer learning and related media,
to develop opportunities which challenge
current assumptions of how teaching and
learning should happen. At the same time,
the examples also illuminate an important
concern: If our peers are understood to be
only those with whom we share an interest,
the possibilities of transcendence
seems ultimately very limited.

The next set of essays offer reflection
on concrete examples located in the
Finnish context. The writers have all been
involved in devising, setting up, or running
experimental examples, and are thus
interestingly positioned to reflect on the
possibilities, challenges, and limitations
of a peer-to-peer related way of organizing
services. In her essay Pauliina Seppälä
makes a reflection on three intriguing examples
of grass-roots activism in Helsinki
emerging from the social-media platform
Facebook. These include a network of
neighbours providing social activities for
the residents of a local centre for asylum
seekers; a platform for creating public artworks
over the temporary walls surrounding
construction sites in the city; and
finally a carnival-like event where anyone
in Helsinki is encouraged to sell and swap
stuff for a day. She discusses some of the
characteristics of the collective and creative
process that lead to them, the services
they offer, and the tensions generated
along the process. She links these development
not only to the ideas of peer-production,
but also to that of the emergence of
everyday social movements, and how the
use of online social media generates new
aspects and issues to discuss. These developments,
she said, also require from the
public sector, not a step back or a giving up
of management and authority to the peers,
but an active engagement and support for
grass-roots initiatives.

Pirjo Tulikukka shares the development
of three cases where residents and
neighborhoods associations in Helsinki
are learning to develop peer-to-peer practices.
The first one accounts for the experiences
around a free platform for neighborhood
websites that has existed since the
late 1990’s. The second case reflects on
the attempts to support the creation of a
neighbourhood stakeholder network. The
last one traces the open and collaborative
strategies of a neighborhood association,
which, in true “peer” fashion, has managed
to establish locations for a community
space in their area. Her cases shed light on
the ways that the traditional organization
of active citizens into registered neighborhood
associations have lately shifted
to include less-hierarchical and more
peer-to-peer organizational structures.
With this development, she elaborates
how the process seems to manifest itself
in small steps, and considers the types of
supporting mesures that could be made
in the process. The role of “caddies”, or
people who support others without doing
things for them, is identified as important.

She also suggest that the generational gaps
and differences, in terms for example of
digital literacy, as well as knowledge of
the areas, need to be addressed for taking
full advantage of all the possibilities with
peer-to-peer strategies.

Turkka Tammi, Tiia Ruokosalo, and
Henna Vuorento report two cases of publicly
funded peer-based services developed
by a NGO that focused on a particular
set of “problematic” users: drug and gambling
addicts. Both cases showcase the use
of web and mobile -based tools that have
enabled new types of peer-based support
services for dealing with addiction. These
services have proven to be successful in
both cases, thus highlighting the many
benefits and the reach of these approaches.

The authors warn however of the
dangers of taking the peer-based approach
too naively, without considerations to the
particularities of situations of use, and
their structural implications. There is still
a need for–and also the right to–access to
professional support, beyond that of the
one provided by peers.

Rudy van der Wekken brings to the
discussion some of the experiences and
concepts that time-banking communities
have experimented with, in their attempts
to offer alternative ways to build exchange
tools. Her thoughts are grounded in the
practical work she initiated to set up the
local Helsinki time-bank. ‘Banking’ time–
and the associated practices of sharing
and solidarity–are presented as a platform
for the development of local and community
services, not only to supply what
is currently unavailable, but as a way to
reframe economical activities and provide
opportunities for influencing and engaging
in new forms of organization. Her
reflections propose time-banking as one
activity that could–if linked to structural
change–strengthens local democratic
action.

Our last article also reports on a
Finnish case, this time from a more
academic perspective, and from a different
level of abstraction. Petra Turkama and
Jukka Mattila have studied the collaborative
creation of a new service in the area
of home care, where organizations and
individuals who are clients, collaborate
in order to develop and provide a service.

They argue that in the discussions of
co-creation of services within this field,
where oganizations have deeply rooted
traditions and structures for providing
them, institutional impacts play a significant
role on making the change possible,
and that this issue has received very little
attention in research."

=Excerpts=


==Introduction==

"This publication is a collection
of articles that deals
broadly with the relationships
between peer-to-peer
dynamics, and the design, production and
provision of public services. Most of the
cases presented are illustrative of recent
developments and discussions in Finnish
society, however other broader international
perspectives which give historical
reflection and future-oriented speculation
on what might be the outcomes are
included.

There are changes taking place in how
the role of citizens in society is experienced–
in terms of how they feel responsible
for things happening–and also in
what is expected from them. The last few
years have witnessed a flurry of citizen-driven
and organized activities that range
from guerrilla gardening with aims to
beautify unattended urban spots, and pop
up restaurants to comment on impractical
bureaucracy; as well as self-assigned
urban planning initiatives to revive the
local community. This has been especially
visible in the larger urban congregations
in Finland, such as Helsinki (Hernberg
2012).

These developments may be seen in
the context of traditional and renewed
spirit of Finnish talkoot1, as well as a
combination of creative and information-sharing
associational activity as an activist
instrument (Paterson 2011). In many
cases, self-assigned innovators and active
people are taking some of their concerns
into their own hands, strengthening their
belonging and cooperation with others.

The Internet has been a supporting factor,
bypassing the limited number of physical
social-forum spaces. Especially, in the
Finnish context, enthusiastic broadband
and mobile data usage is a contributing
factor, as the mainstream (and mobile)
adoption of social media platforms, such
as Facebook, have provided some groups
with easy ways to communicate, forming
online groups and self-defined information
channels.

Hand-in-hand with these above local
trends, we also witness the impacts of
gobalized issues, such as the economic
crisis, perceived stagnation of the welfare
state, and the challenges of an aging population.

Taken together, all these developments
set the ground for a more general
debate on how our relationship with the
state should evolve, and how to imagine
and organise common affairs in new ways
(Benkler 2006). There is no doubt that
there is a renewed interest to understand
processes, logics and incentives that can
make possible new partnerships between
the public-sector, private-sector, third sector,
and citizens, in order to create and
produce public services. Amongst the
many aspects to consider, active forms of
citizenship, broader public participation,
and the role of ‘peers’ have emerged as key
issues. Naturally these phenomena are not
limited to Finland or Northern Europe,
but are happening worldwide at different
scales, speeds, and with different focuses
.


We are, of course, not the only ones
giving attention to related issues in
Finland. 

For example, the Finnish Innovation
Fund (Sitra) has commissioned
several reports on similar topics, including
one on the future of the welfare state
in the time of communities (Mokka &
Neuvonen 2006), and a more recent document
providing an overview of contemporaty
Finnish co-production projects building
on the “talkoot” tradition (Aitamurto,
Siivonen & Lovio 2012). From a different
perspective our own Aalto University has
also been involved in experimenting with
new service design approaches involving
both citizens and municipalities. The list
can be expanded, but for now, it is suffice
to say that there is a clear need to increase
the understanding of the logic and incentives
in these types of processes; this compilation
is our contribution to this larger
discussion.

We are interested in the underlying
messages that these new trends and
emerging weak signals are posing, and
we are aware of the need for a multidisciplinary
perspective. There are many
challenges and opportunities in designing,
developing and maintaining services
for participatory modes of governance,
including co-creation and peer-to-peer
aspects. We ask, what can be learned from
current research, and what is happening
already beyond academia? With the aim
to increase the opportunities for dialogue
between the Finnish scene and the international
context, we have gathered this
collection of articles, with some providing
more background information and
introducing useful concepts; the others
describe and reflect upon local ongoing
grassroots or organized experiments. They
all deal with the collaboration and engagement
of “peers” in the ideation, creation
or provisioning of services. We hope to
offer something for academics as well as
professionals engaged in media and service-
design, socially-engaged processes,
cultural production and public service
management located both in small to large
institutions, as well as for citizens wanting
to do something. Thus the writing styles
and formats within this compilation are a
rather eclectic mix.

Many of the articles presented are the
result of presentations and discussions
that started in 2010 at the seminar we organized
in Aalto University School of Arts,
Design and Architecture on the theme
of co-creation, co-governance and peer to
peer production of public services3. A
summary report of the seminar is included
as an Appendix in this publication. The
other articles have been added in the
process of organizing the compilation.


To summarise, the articles in this collection
confirm that something is happening
in terms of experimenting with peer
to peer activities, and that new media and
the Internet in particular, play an important
role in making them visible and scalable.
In all the accounts and reflections it is
possible to see how historical conditions
and local resources frame the ways in
which these experimentations take shape.

There are many flavours emerging from
diverse historical continuities, as well as
from disruptive sprouts of new activities.
Many of the authors have highlighted
the challenges related to the organization
of peer-to-peer networks and their
working strategies; at the same time
others have also proposed best practices
and models. Several of the authors have
also expressedly taken up the need for
rethinking the role of the government in
a reality where peer-to-peer support and
organization is becoming more viable and
efficient than previously. Michel Bauwens,
for example, provides a clear vision for
this new role, that of the partner state.

Pestoff also concludes on the need to think
holistically about the policy implications,
so that these developments will really
support meaningful involvement and
citizen empowerment. It is still early to
state whether the peer-to-peer movement
will gain weight, and to what extend it will
change the way economic, political and
social life will be organized in the future.
This publication has merely but scratched
the surface, and we hope it will trigger our
readers to join us in asking: What are the
possibilities for the future? What is the
role of existing local socio-political contexts?

(We’d like to hear from and about
other similar experiences in the world).

Ultimately, how do we find the right
balance between the traditional forces
of market, the state, and the emerging
citizen-driven actions?"


==Other Excerpts==

* Essay: Innovations in public services: [[Co-Production and New Public Governance in Europe]] By Victor Pestoff (SE), Institute for Civil Society Studies, Stockholm

=More Information=

* cover graphic, http://co-p2p.mlog.taik.fi/files/2012/05/Picture-41.png


[[Category:Peerproduction]]

[[Category:Finland]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Public Services]]