
'''Book: The Edu-factory Collective (eds) (2009) Toward a Global Autonomous University. Cognitive Labor, The Production of Knowledge, and Exodus from the Education Factory. New York: Autonomedia, 2009'''


=Review=

Elizabeth Johnson and Eli Meyerhoff:

"The Edu-Factory’s project began on the basis of a simple tenet: “What was once the
factory, is now the university”. Starting with analysis and critique of the rise of
“cognitive capitalism” and the commodification of education, the Edu-Factory
Collective took shape around the need for action against these trends. It emerged as an
organization seeking to create a community of "struggle and exodus, for the political
composition of differences in a space-time of class, just as the factory was for the
working class” (8).

This project – and, subsequently, their recent collection – is fraught with tensions. And
these tensions may constitute the volume’s greatest assets. The clear focus in this
volume is on generating analysis of the contemporary conditions of higher education;
connecting struggles on the ground; and creating a language with which to find
commonalities and articulate important differences. This was the goal when the Edu-
Factory opened up a series of online discussions around several themes: conflicts over
knowledge production in the global university, processes of hierarchization in the
educational marketplace, cognitive capitalism and labour, and the constitution of
autonomous education projects. These discussions gave birth to many of the essays in
Toward a Global Autonomous University.

One of the benefits of such a forum is that it provides space for creating common
languages. Much to their credit, the Edu-Factory approach to organizing forums for
communication did not presuppose the terms and conditions of the critique they offer.
Instead of policing language, the Edu-factory has created a "space where struggles
connect, a space of resistance and organizational experiments" (3). To describe and
affirm this benefit, the Edu-factory collective has used the concept of “heterolingual
translation”, which they define as “the construction of the common starting from the
multiplicity of forms of resistance and from movements of living knowledge” (6),
which Sakai and Solomon see “as a social movement of ‘permanent translation’…
devoted to producing the multitude of foreigners we can become” (137-8).

The result is a series of essays that are often disjointed and at times at odds with one
another; the arguments and perspectives expressed in the book’s 24 chapters reveal
tensions inherent to such a project. But contrary to expectations, such tensions serve to
constitute the volume’s coherence: each of these chapters appears as a piece of a wellinformed
and passionate conversation.

The essays that comprise this volume – and the tensions that characterize the spaces
between them – speak toward the socio-political commitments of the Edu-Factory more
broadly. By beginning with the incommensurable forms of resistance and living
knowledge, many of these essays invert the dominant, capitalist narratives of higher
education that portray progress as driven by bureaucratic or capitalist decision-makers
and the market. This inversion is evident not only in the authors’ analyses but also in
the Edu-factory’s selection of essays: much of the book is devoted to narratives of the
productivity of struggles around the university. These include: resistance to neoliberal
retrenchment in South Africa by unions of university staff, Greek students occupying
hundreds of universities to protest marketizing reforms, student resistance in France
against the precarization of the labour force, “open source unionism” in the US among
contingent faculty, the Counter-Cartography Collective’s mapping the terrain of
precarious university labour and life, and autonomous education experiments in India,
the US, and Argentina.

These narratives of struggles, as well as the volume’s more theoretical pieces, are
interlaced with tensions between some of their key concepts. Some conflicts emerge
over the question of the most effective language for describing the antagonisms in these
struggles. Here we focus our review around just a set of these tensions: the relative
efficacy of the concepts of cognitive capitalism, the common(s), and the public vs.
private dichotomy. We conclude by highlighting the essays’ contributions that move
beyond critique and toward reimagining higher education in the form of a “global
autonomous university” or otherwise."
(http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/9-4/9-4johnsonmeyerhoff.pdf)


=More Information=

Detailed review at http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/9-4/9-4johnsonmeyerhoff.pdf


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Education]]