'''* Report: Shadowy figures: tracking illicit financial transactions in the murky world of digital currencies, peer–to–peer networks, and mobile device payments" by John Villasenor, Cody Monk and Christopher Bronk.'''

Document available at: http://www.bakerinstitute.org/publications/ITP-pub-FinancialTransactions-082911.pdf

= Abstract =

The history of the movement of money is as complex and varied as the history of money itself,
and includes ships laden with gold bullion, desert caravans carrying salt or cowry shells, armored
trucks filled with banknotes, paper checks, and today, a large and quickly growing list of digital
transfer methods. Secrecy and anonymity have always played roles in the movement of money,
most commonly because they offer a strong measure of privacy and protection against being
targeted by thieves, but also because the parties in financial transactions can have other
reasons—some legitimate, some not—for keeping a low profile.

The combination of the enormous growth in social networks, the complexity of peer-to-peer
systems and software, and the number of Internet and wirelessly connected devices is altering the
landscape of financial transactions at a rate and to a degree that is unprecedented. Today, such
transactions can be conducted not only using traditional, state-backed currencies, but also
through purely digital currencies, virtual currencies, and virtual goods. In addition, mobile
phone-based money transfer systems enabling traditional currencies to be moved in novel ways
are experiencing rapid adoption, particularly in developing nations.

Almost no one would argue that governments do not have a right to track and trace digital
financial transactions associated with activities such as terrorism and human trafficking. It is less
clear, however, how governments can surmount the formidable technical and organizational
challenges associated with detecting and monitoring these transactions. The solution will require
a combination of self-regulation, government-industry collaboration, and change in both
technology and culture within government agencies.


= Bibliography =

* William Goldman, script for All The President’s Men (based on the book of the same name by Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward), Internet Movie Script Database, accessed July 15, 2011, http://www.imsdb.com/scripts/All- the-President's-Men.html. 

* Hawala is a money transfer system that has its roots in the Islamic world. In a Hawala transfer, money can be provided to an operator in one country and disbursed to the recipient by an operator in another country. See “Hawala Definition,” Duhaime Legal Dictionary, http://www.duhaime.org/LegalDictionary/H/Hawala.aspx. 

* Nikos Passas, “Hawala and Other Informal Value Transfer Systems: How to Regulate Them?,” Special Issue: Regulation, Risk and Corporate Crime in a “Globalised” Era, Risk Management 5, no. 2 (2003): 49-59.

* Kim Zetter, “Bullion and Bandits: The Improbable Rise and Fall of E-Gold,” Wired, June 9, 2011, http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2009/06/e-gold/all. 

* “Digital Currency Business E-Gold Indicted For Money Laundering And Illegal Money Transmitting,” U.S. Department of Justice, last modified April 27, 2011, accessed June 23, 2011, http://www.justice.gov/criminal/ cybercrime/egoldIndict.htm. 

* Robert Lemos, “E-Gold pleads guilty to money laundering,” SecurityFocus, last modified July 23, 2008, accessed July 23, 2010, http://www.securityfocus.com/news/11528. 

* Satoshi Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System,” accessed July 23, 2011, http://www.bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf. 

* Annie Lowrey, “My Money Is Cooler Than Yours: Why the new electronic currency Bitcoin is a favorite of libertarian hipsters and criminals,” Slate, last modified May 18, 2011, accessed July 16, 2011, http://www.slate.com/ id/2294980/. 

* Detailed charts regarding recent bitcoin transactions and other statistics are available at bitcoin charts, accessed July 23, 2011, http://bitcoincharts.com/markets/. 

* Michael Protos, “Digital currency makes cocaine and heroin deliveries as easy as Domino’s,” Government Computer News, last modified June 9, 2011, accessed July 17, 2011, http://gcn.com/articles/2011/06/09/bitcoins- digital-currency-silk-road-charles-schumer-joe-manchin.aspx?s=gcndaily_100611. 

* “Manchin Urges Federal Law Enforcement to Shut Down Online Black Market for Illegal Drugs,” press release from the office of Senator Joe Manchin (D-W.V.), last modified June 6, 2011, accessed July 17, 2011, http://manchin.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/press-releases?ContentRecord_id=aeae6e96-7d88-4fed-811b- f0d7f3bc1636&ContentType_id=ec9a1142-0ea4-4086-95b2-b1fc9cc47db5&Group_id=e3f09d56-daa7-43fd-aa8b- bd2aeb8d7777.

* BK Linden, “Q1 2011 Linden Dollar Economy Metrics Up, Users and Usage Unchanged” Second Life, last modified May 6, 2011, accessed August 1, 2011, http://community.secondlife.com/t5/Featured-News/Q1-2011- Linden-Dollar-Economy-Metrics-Up-Users-and-Usage/ba-p/856693. 

* Edward Castronova, “A cost-benefit analysis of real-money trade in the products of synthetic economies,” Info 8, no. 6 (2006): 51-68. 

* Richard Heeks, “Current Analysis and Future Research Agenda on ‘Gold Farming’: Real-World Production in Developing Countries for the Virtual Economies of Online Games” (IDPM Working Papers, Institute for Development Policy and Management, School of Environment and Development, University of Manchester, U.K., 2008): 2. 

* “Samoa,” CIA World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ws.html. 

* Choe Sang-Hun, “Seoul Warns of Latest North Korean Threat: An Army of Online Gaming Hackers,” New York Times, last modified August 4, 2011, accessed August 5, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/05/world/ asia/05korea.html.

* Ronny Kerr, “Zynga to make $500 million for Facebook in 2011,” Vator News, accessed July 7, 2011, http://vator.tv/news/2011-07-07-zynga-to-make-500-million-for-facebook-in-2011.

* Justin Smith and Charles Hudson, “Inside Virtual Goods: The U.S. Virtual Goods Market 2010-2011,” Inside Network, accessed July 22, 2011, http://www.insidevirtualgoods.com/us-virtual-goods/. 

* “Mobile money users in India to reach 10 crore by 2015,” EE Times India, last modified June 28, 2011, accessed July 17, 2011, http://www.eetindia.co.in/ART_8800645790_1800005_NT_8f80498c.HTM.

* "M-Pesa Moved Sh727 Billion Last Year,” Mobile Money Africa, last modified July 5, 2011, accessed July 17, 2011, http://mobilemoneyafrica.com/?p=3757. The annual total of 727 Kenyan shillings corresponds to a daily average of 2 billion Kenyan shillings. The corresponding average daily volume figure of over $24 million is a conservative calculation using an exchange rate of 81 Kenyan shillings to the dollar. During 2010, the exchange rate varied from about 75 to about 82 shillings to the dollar and was below 81, often by a substantial amount, for much of the year. See “US Dollar (USD) in Kenyan Shilling (KES),” Google Finance, http://www.google.com/ finance?q=USDKES for historical exchange rates between the two currencies.

* William Jack and Tavneet Suri, “The Economics of M-­‐PESA: An Update,” MIT, last modified October 2010, accessed July 17, 2011, http://www.mit.edu/~tavneet/M-PESA_Update.pdf. 

* “Savings” was defined in the MIT survey as holding funds for more than 24 hours. 

* Biodun Coker, “Safaricom’s mobile money services rakes in N1.34trn,” BusinessDay, last modified July 8, 2011, accessed July 17, 2011, http://www.businessdayonline.com/NG/index.php/markets/companies-and-market/ 24274-safaricoms-mobile-money-services-rakes-in-n134trn.

* Marina Solin and Andrew Zerzan, “Mobile Money: Methodology for Assessing Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Risks,” The GSM Association, last modified January 2010, accessed July 17, 2011, http://www.ifc.org/ifcext/gfm.nsf/AttachmentsByTitle/Tool10.11.GSMAMethodology-AssessingAMLRisk/$FILE/ Tool+10.11.+GSMA+Methodology+-+Assessing+AML+Risk.pdf.

* “About Us,” GSM World, accessed August 1, 2011, http://www.gsmworld.com/about-us/index.htm. “M-PESA Agents,” Safaricom, http://www.safaricom.co.ke/index.php?id=252. 

* People v. Western Express Intl., Inc., N.Y. Slip Op 03136 (App. Div., 1st Dept. 2011). 

* “Decision denying motion to dismiss appeal,” New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division, First Department, last modified April 19, 2011, accessed July 20, 2011, http://www.courts.state.ny.us/REPORTER/ 3dseries/2011/2011_03136.htm. 

* “Gartner Says Worldwide Mobile Device Sales to End Users Reached 1.6 Billion Units in 2010; Smartphone Sales Grew 72 Percent in 2010,” Gartner, Inc., last modified February 9, 2011, accessed July 21, 2011. http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1543014. 

* The CIA World Factbook states that 73.8 percent of the global population of 6.9 billion is aged 15 or over. See “World,” CIA World Factbook, accessed July 21, 2011, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world- factbook/geos/xx.html. 

* “Worldwide Mobile Device Sales,” Gartner. 

* Sending money in M-PESA is accomplished by selecting a menu option on the phone, entering the recipient’s phone number, and a PIN. A confirmation is sent to both the sender and recipient via SMS. See “Send (Transfer) Money,” Safaricom, accessed July 22, 2011, http://www.safaricom.co.ke/index.php?id=268. 

* The CIA’s economic analysts charged with estimating the economic output of the two Germanys employed different methodologies, and apparently did so in a state of relative isolation from one another. See “The Tyrannical Numbers,” Central Intelligence Agency, last modified July 7, 2008, accessed July 19, 2011, https://www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/books-and-monographs/cia- assessments-of-the-soviet-union-the-record-versus-the-charges/tyran.html. 

* Ross Kerber, “The Whistleblower,” The Boston Globe, last modified January 8, 2009, accessed July 16, 2011, http://www.boston.com/business/articles/2009/01/08/the_whistleblower/?s_campaign=8315. 

* “Facing the Unknown: Building a strategy for regulatory compliance in an uncertain landscape,” SWIFT white paper, last modified June 2011, accessed July 19, 2011, http://www.swift.com/resources/documents/ SWIFT_Regulatory_White_paper_201106_FINAL.pdf. 

* SWIFT was established in the early 1970s. See “SWIFT History,” SWIFT, accessed July 22, 2011, http://www.swift.com/about_swift/company_information/swift_history.page. 

* “Company Information,” SWIFT, accessed July 22, 2011, http://www.swift.com/info. 

* FSSCC members include many of the largest companies in the American financial industry. See “Council Members,” Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council, accessed July 22, 2011, https://www.fsscc.org/fsscc/ about/members.jsp. 

* Elizabeth Montalbano, “Government, Financial Industry Launch Cybersecurity Collaboration,” InformationWeek, December 7, 2010, accessed July 22, 2011, http://www.informationweek.com/news/government/ security/228600170.

* “Memorandum of Understanding Between Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate and Department of Commerce National Institute of Standards and Technology and Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council for Critical Infrastructure Protection and Homeland Security,” last modified December 2010, accessed July 22, 2011, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/ FSSCC_DHS_NIST _MOU_12062010.pdf. 

* The Academic Alliance includes the National Security Higher Education Advisory Board. See “Counterintelligence Strategic Partnerships,” Federal Bureau of Investigation, accessed July 18, 2011, http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/investigate/counterintelligence/strategic-partnerships. 

* Gavin Andresen, “Gavin will visit the CIA,” Bitcoin Forum, posted April 27, 2011, accessed July 14, 2011, http://forum.bitcoin.org/?topic=6652.0. 

* Gavin Andresen, “@gavinandresen,” Twitter, accessed July 14, 2011, http://twitter.com/#!/gavinandresen/ status/80785477342478336.

* Mehmet Ercan Nergiz, Christopher Clifton, and Ahmet Erhan Nergiz, “Multirelational k-Anonymity.” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 21, no. 8 (August 2009): 1104-1117. 

* Anthony Zinni, “The New World Order,” (lecture, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, April 15, 2008): 11-12, accessed July 14, 2011, http://www.cornell.edu/video/transcripts/20080415-anthony-zinni.pdf. 

* Diana Raschke, “Asymmetric Warfare Requires Intelligence Community Reorganization,” SIGNAL Magazine (AFCEA.org), accessed July 14, 2011, http://www.afcea.org/signal/articles/templates/Signal_Article_ Template.asp?articleid=1553&zoneid=231.

* Colin Gray, “Thinking Asymmetrically in Times of Terror,” Parameters 32, no. 1 (2002): 5-6.

* Declan McCullagh, “ISP data retention plan hits Capitol Hill snag,” CNET, last modified July 12, 2011, accessed July 22, 2011, http://news.cnet.com/8301-31921_3-20078785-281/isp-data-retention-plan-hits-capitol-hill- snag/.


[[Category:Security]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Articles]]