'''* Report: Tracking Value. By Hilde Sijbring, Julia Moss et al. Nederland Circulair & Circle Economy, 2019.'''

URL = https://sustainablefinancelab.nl/wp-content/uploads/sites/334/2020/02/202001-Tracking-value-CoP-Fairphone-.pdf

THE CASE STUDY: FAIRPHONE

=Executive Summary=

"The mission of this CoP (Community of Practice) was to
tackle the complexities around tracking assets, with
a focus on identity, location and condition of the
assets. The relevant existing technologies have
been explored and the financial and legal
implications of tracking assets have been
investigated.

Modularity makes the recently launched Fairphone 3
easy to repair for customers and service partners,
reducing associated time and material costs.

Although Fairphone currently has a for-sales
business model in which they lose control and
ownership of the devices after the sale, the social
enterprise intends to offer '''Fairphone-as-a-Service'''
(FaaS) to businesses. 


This requires tackling a few key
challenges:

1. Tracking location, condition and corresponding
(residual) value of circulating Fairphones and/or
modules over their lifecycle.

2. Managing the increased organizational
complexity associated with providing a service.

3. Overcoming financial challenges with respect to,
for example, defining value propositions for the
different qualities of assets.

4. Addressing legal challenges with respect to data
privacy.


'''WHY TRACKING ASSETS?'''

Tracking the value of modular assets in a PaaS
proposition is of utmost importance. Decisionmaking is improved with regards to the cascading of
components (e.g. refurbishing, re-using or recycling)
and predictive maintenance, aiding to the circular
goals of the entrepreneur to improve future design
aimed at increased longevity of the assets and
recovery of as much material as possible. Tracking
assets creates ways to optimize the business model
by creating intelligence that is needed to provision
for future costs and to accurately price the service
contract.


Using the FaaS business model as a case study, this
white paper focuses on providing answers to:

• What are the possibilities of tracking for
intelligent management and monitoring of
circulating assets?

• How can asset tracking contribute to an improved
business case in circular business propositions?


'''DESIGNING A PROOF OF CONCEPT'''

As part of this CoP, a proof of concept was designed
to illustrate the potential of automated tracking of
different metrics focused on the condition of the
battery. First, a feasibility study was done to
understand which tracking techniques worked best
on the different modules, including the battery.
Secondly, an app was built from which the most
important battery-metrics could be read: the
charging temperature and the total charge. Lastly, a
mock-up software instruction was written that
models the condition of the battery from the
metrics. This way, batteries can easily be categorized
and sorted according to their condition."
(https://sustainablefinancelab.nl/wp-content/uploads/sites/334/2020/02/202001-Tracking-value-CoP-Fairphone-.pdf)


=Key Learnings=

* Based upon research of multiple tracking technologies, it was found that QR codes,
memory chips and RFID tags are the most suitable tracking technologies.

* Tracking assets provides insight into the location and condition of assets giving the
entrepreneur a better grip on the assets. Therefore tracking can help to lower the
risk profile of the proposition, making it an interesting business case for financiers.

* Gathering data on the condition of and required maintenance for assets leads to
improved estimates of future contractual obligations (provisions) and inventory
required, which strengthens the business case.

* Collecting insights about usage and performance of assets enables the
entrepreneur to improve the product and further increasing the product lifespan
The data generated when tracking assets is subject to data protection laws and
regulations. The main questions an entrepreneur should ask himself are: How is the
data retrieved? What type of (personal) data is collected and processed? Why is this
data needed?

* Obtaining consent from a user for gathering (personal) data is the preferred and
safest route to choose, however, customers should be able to withdraw their
consent. The main question to be addressed is whether the withdrawal of consent
is technically feasible.

* For enterprises in need of an infrastructure that provides better grip over their
assets, tracking technologies generate insights that are indispensable for a transition
to the circular economy. Circular business models can be improved and track records
can be built, which ultimately could provide the comfort for financiers to take the
plunge. This pilot with Fairphone paves the way."
(https://sustainablefinancelab.nl/wp-content/uploads/sites/334/2020/02/202001-Tracking-value-CoP-Fairphone-.pdf)

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]
[[Category:Circular Economy]]
[[Category:Cases]]
[[Category:P2P Accounting]]