

=Description=

James Quilligan:


"Beginning with Garrett Hardin’s classic example of shepherds who
share a field to graze their flocks — but unwittingly cause the land
to be overused and degraded — the idea of scarcity through over-consumption
has been called a [[Tragedy of the Commons]].


There are countless instances of openly-accessed resources becoming vulnerable
to encroachment and misuse, leading to acute social or
ecological problems. Yet Elinor Ostrom and others have shown
that failed commons are not inevitable. When local users communicate,
build trust, and organize to create rules to govern how
their resources should be used, they can protect their commons
from overuse in the interest of the common good.

So the primary challenge facing the world is not one of failed commons.

Rather, it’s a tragedy of enclosures — the legalization of private
property and commodity exchange by the state, and the
transference and overuse of commonly managed resources by the
marketplace.

The history of the privatization of capital and natural
resources is well known. Beginning in the 12th century in
northern Europe, and intensifying during the 16th century, the
emerging free market laid claim to what seemed to be an endless
supply of natural resources existing in empty and limitless space.
Enterprising merchants, bankers and politicians enclosed these
‘vacant’ areas and turned them into legally titled property. Over
the past several centuries, similar enclosure movements have
spread across the world, subjugating and extracting resources
which were previously un-ownable, fully accessible and often governed
by local custom. Under the system of property rights and
sovereign boundaries that has evolved, resource managers (public
sector) and producers and providers (private sector) are kept
distinctly separate from resource users (commoners). 

These social divisions produce and reproduce the modern institutional
norms of economic management and the creation of market value
through profit and interest, which are said to be the basis of dynamic
social progress and economic growth. But through this
process of wealth creation, poor and native peoples have been
evicted from their villages and lands and displaced from their
means of subsistence, while customary rights and traditions over
resources are criminalized. 

The history of enclosures is a legacy
of struggle and violence over rightful claims to property, which
continues today."
(http://www.kosmosjournal.org/kjo2/bm~doc/people-sharing-resources.pdf)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]