
=Description=

Max Saxer:

"Transformative Change Making (TCM)
is a method to create maximum societal
buy in for disruptive reforms. To achieve
the ultimate objective of shifting the
development path, the aim is to build a
broad societal transformative alliance.
By using a set of techniques to visualise
the political playing field, TCM facilitates
strategic debates over the best entry points,
incentive structures and narratives to bring
about change. 

As long as key stakeholders see their interests
best served in the status quo, it is very hard
to build a broad societal coalition for change.
The main challenge for change makers is then
to sway some of these spoilers to embrace
change. Stakeholders are unlikely to act
against what they perceive to be in their best
interest. However, people do not determine
what is in their best interest in an isolated way,
but within the echo chamber of their lifeworld.
To be more precise, “what is happening” and
“what can be said and done” is defined within
their discourse community."
(http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/bueros/indien/13269.pdf)


=Principles=

"When technological, economic or social changes are transforming
society, but effective mechanism to shape these transformations
are missing, crises can occur. Transformative Change Making
(TCM) introduces a new method to create the societal buy-in
needed to tackle such transformation crises.

* TCM uses a set of techniques to break social silos, makes use of
the knowledge disseminated through society, and visualises the
challenges in the political field. TCM strengthens the ability of
policy makers to reach out to constituencies, encourages private
sector contribution to the common good, builds the strategic
capacity of civil society and political literacy of all stakeholders.

* Making use of discourse steering as an instrument, TCM proposes
an alternative vision for a better tomorrow, constructs a credible
change narrative and aims at creating success stories around
catalytic projects.

* TCM has been successfully used to facilitate reform processes in
India, Pakistan, and Thailand. As a work in progress, it will be
further adapted to match the local context. This beta version of
the practical guide is meant to give practitioners an easy to use
introduction into the method."
(http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/bueros/indien/13269.pdf)


=More Information=

'''* Report: [[Practical Guide to Transformative Change Making]]. By Marc Saxer. Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, March 2017'''

URL = http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/bueros/indien/13269.pdf


* [[Discourse Community]]


==Bibliography==

Brown, Tim. Change by Design. How Design
Thinking Transforms Organizations and
Inspires Innovation. Harper Business, New
York, 2009.

Denkwerk Demokratie, Sprache. Macht.
Politik. Politische Diskurse verstehen und
führen, Campus Verlag, Berlin 2014.

Grin, John, Jan Rotman, and Johan Schot.
Transitions to Sustainable Development.
New Direction in the Study of Long Term
Transformative Change, London, 2010.

Kahane, Adam. Transformative Scenario
Planning: Working Together to Change the
Future, Berrett-Koehler, 2012

Lakoff, George. Don’t Think of an Elephant.
Know your Values and Frame the Debate.
Chelsea Green, New York, 2004, 2014.

Lakoff, George and Elisabeth Wehling, The
Little Blue Book. The Essential Guide to
Thinking and Talking Democratic. Free Press,
New York, 2012.

Lakoff, George and Elisabeth Wehling.
Your Brain’s Politics. How the Science of
Mind Explains the Political Divide. Imprint
Academic, 2016.

Scoones, Ian, Melissa Leach, and Peter Newell
(eds). The Politics of Green Transformations.
Pathways to Sustainability, Routledge, New
York, 2015.

Sommer, Bernd and Harald Welzer.
Transformationsdesign. Wege in eine
Zukunftsfähige Moderne. Oekom,
München, 2017.

Wehling, Elisabeth. Politisches Framing. Wie
eine Nation sich ihr Denken einredet – und
daraus Politik macht. Halem, Köln, 2016.

Westen, Drew. The Political Brain. The Role
of Emotion in Deciding the Fate of the
Nation. Public Affairs, 2007.


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]