=Discussion=

==Towards a Transnationalisation of the state, rather than a transnational state==

Kanishka Jayasuriya:

"I find the general approach of the transnational state or globality useful in examining
some key aspects of the global political economy. It moves us beyond unhelpful debates
about the return of the state and/or misguided attempts to perceive global conflict in
terms of a return to national developmentalism. In sum, I think it usefully takes us beyond
the methodological nationalism that troubles much of the mainstream and critical
Political Economy literatures.

Having said this, my own approach differs from these perspectives in that I see
the crucial issue as the transformation of the state rather than the emergence of a new
transnational state. At the same time, we need to see the development of these
transnational forms of governance as an ongoing process that involves accommodation
and contestation between various ‘national’ and transnational regimes within the state. I
would emphasize the strategic choices and conflicts between key actors in rescaling
projects. It is these kinds of conflicts that drive state transformation, and I think this
should be at the centre of a research agenda on transnational regulation.

In addition, I think we should place more emphasis on the nature and
dynamics of the emerging transnational administrative/regulatory law, even if this is
often of the soft law variety. As I indicate in my responses above, it is the complex and
fragmented nature of this global administrative law that defines the new transnational
governance. This transnational law and governance is likely to be very different from what
is usually associated with the national state. This is something that is neglected by notions
such as globality or the transnational state."
(http://www.criticalglobalisation.com/Issue3/127_138_INTERVIEW_JAYASURIYA_JCGS3.pdf)


==The [[Transnational State]] vs. nation-state global imperialism==

(W. I. Robinson / Historical Materialism 15 (2007) 71–93; from a review of [[Empire of Capital]])

William I. Robinson:

"Wood dismisses the proposition that a ‘global state’ – or what I have termed
in my own work a transnational state (TNS) apparatus – may be coming into
existence because, in her view, any such argument is based on the idea that the
territorial state is increasingly obsolete. In Wood’s view, those who refer to
current world processes as globalisation define them as ‘the decline of the
territorial state’.22 Yet this is an outright straw-man. No one, beyond a few
bourgeois commentators,23 suggests that the nation-state is disappearing. I
know of no Marxist or critical analysis of globalisation that maintains that
capital can now, or ever has been able to, exist without a state. Wood’s claim
that global capital needs (local) states is neither original nor particularly
controversial. Indeed, I, among others, have argued for many years that a
fundamental contradiction of global capitalism is that, for historical reasons,
economic globalisation has unfolded within the political framework of a
nation-state system. Th e real issue is not whether global capitalism can dispense
with the state – it cannot. Rather, it is that the state may be in a process of
transformation in consort with the restructuring and transformation of world
capitalism. Th e question is: to what extent and in what ways may new state
forms and institutional configurations be emerging, and how may we theorise
these new configurations?

Wood, here as elsewhere,24 sees the nation-state not as an historical outcome
but as immanent to capitalist development. But why should we assume that
the nation-state is the only possible political form for organising social life in
the capitalist system? Wood’s reasoning in emphasising territoriality seems to
be tautological: capital needs the state and the states that we have happen to
be national states. What is the theoretical justification for assuming that the
state is necessarily territorial? If the state is an institutionalised class relation,
why must it have to be territorially conceived? Concomitantly, why should we
assume that social classes – and specifically with regard to the topic at hand,
the capitalist class – are necessarily organised along national lines? That they
have been is something which must be problematised, that is, explained with
reference to how the course of history actually unfolded and not by reference
to some abstract law or principle of the capitalist system and the modern
world. Th e nation-state system, or inter-state system, I suggest, is an historical
outcome, the particular form in which capitalism came into being based on a
complex relation between production, classes, political power and territoriality.

In order to understand the transformation of the state and the rise of a TNS,
not to mention twenty-first-century imperialism, we need to return to an
historical-materialist theoretical conceptualisation of the state, not as a ‘thing’,
or a fictional macro-agent, but as a specific social relation inserted into larger
social structures that may take different, and historically-determined, institutional
forms, only one of which is the nation-state. Nothing in the current
epoch suggests that the historic configuration of space and its institutionalisation
is immutable rather than itself subject to transformation. Th is is to say that the
political relations of capitalism are entirely historical, such that state forms can
only be understood as historical forms of capitalism.25

There are vital functions that the national state performs for transnational
capital, among them, sets of local economic policies aimed at achieving
macroeconomic equilibrium, the provision of property laws, infrastructure,
and, of course, social control and ideological reproduction – and, here, Wood
and I are in agreement. However, there are other conditions that transnational
capitalists require for the functioning and reproduction of global capitalism.
National states are ill-equipped to organise a supranational unification of
macroeconomic policies, create a unified field for transnational capital to
operate, impose transnational trade regimes, supranational ‘transparency’, and
so forth. Th e construction of a supranational legal and regulatory system for
the global economy in recent years has been the task of sets of transnational
institutions whose policy prescriptions and actions have been synchronised
with those of neoliberal national state that have been captured by local
transnationally-oriented forces. Marxists who theorise a TNS apparatus do
not argue, as Wood would have us believe, that supranational institutions such
as the IMF or the WTO replace or ‘render irrelevant’ the national state. Rather,
25. Although the proposition cannot be explored here, I suggest that the explanation for the
particular geographic expression in the nation-state system that world capitalism acquired is to
be found in the historical uneven development of the system, including its gradual spread
worldwide. Territorialised space came to house distinct market and capital accumulation
conditions, often against one another, a process that tended to be self-reproducing as it deepened
and became codified by the development of national states, constitutions, legal systems, politics
and culture, and the agency of collective actors (e.g., Westphalia, nationalism, etc.). This
particular spatial form of the uneven development of capitalism is being overcome by the
globalisation of capital and markets and the gradual equalisation of accumulation conditions this
involves.


We cannot, as Wood does, simply shrug off the increasingly salient role of
a transnational institutional structure in co-ordinating global capitalism and
imposing capitalist domination beyond national borders. Even if one were to
disagree with my particular thesis of a TNS, this transnational institutionality
needs to be theorised. Clearly, the IMF, by imposing a structural adjustment
programme that opens up a given country to the penetration of transnational
capital, the subordination of local labour, and the extraction of wealth
by transnational capitalists, is operating as a state institution to facilitate
the exploitation of local labour by global capital, and is hence engaging
in imperialism as defined by Wood. How are we to understand these
IMF practices? Standard dogma would reduce them to instruments of ‘US’
imperialism. Yet I know of no single IMF structural adjustment programme
that creates conditions in the intervened country that favours ‘US’ capital in
any special way, rather than opening up the intervened country, its labour and
resources, to capitalists from any corner of the world. Th is outcome is in sharp
distinction to earlier imperialism, in which a particular core country sealed off
the colonised country or sphere of influence as its own exclusive preserve for
exploitation. Th erefore it is more accurate to characterise the IMF (or for that
matter, the World Bank, other regional banks, the WTO, etc.) as an instrument
not of ‘US’ imperialism but of transnational capitalist exploitation."


...

In Summary:

"We argue that the national state is being transformed and increasingly absorbed
functionally into a larger transnational institutional structure that involves
complex new relations between national states and supra- or transnational
institutions, on the one hand, and diverse class and social forces, on the other.
A TNS apparatus is emerging under globalisation from within the system
of nation-states. An emergent TNS apparatus need not have a centralised form
as historically developed in modern nations; it may exist in both transnational
institutions and the transformation of national states. Transnational bodies
such as the IMF and the WTO have worked in tandem with national states to
re-articulate labour relations, financial institutions and circuits of production
into a system of global accumulation. As national states are captured by
transnational capitalist forces, they tend to serve the interests of global over
local accumulation processes. Th e TNS, for instance, has played a key role in
imposing the neoliberal model on the old Third World and therefore in
reinforcing the class relations of global capitalism."
(http://www.soc.ucsb.edu/faculty/robinson/Assets/pdf/woods.pdf)



=Bibliography=

Robinson, W. I. 2001a. Social Theory and Globalization: The Rise of a Transnational
State. Theory and Society , 30(2): pp. 157-200.

---. 2001b. Theory of the Global State: Globality as an Unfinished Revolution. By Martin
Shaw. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2000. American Political
Science Association, 95 (4): pp 1045-1047

---. 2004. A Theory of Global Capitalism: Production, Class, and State in a Transnational
World. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.

Shaw, M. 2000. Theory of the Global State: Globality as an Unfinished Revolution.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]