
URL = http://www.transnationalrepublic.org/


=Description=

"The Transnational Republic is a group of artists that are working to construct the first Transnational Republic where citizens are defined by the similarity of their beliefs and feelings. The new republic will represent its citizens on a civil level, for the first time not succumbing to national interests but concentrating on global concerns.

The first Transnational Republic was founded in 1996 in Munich, Germany, by brothers Georg and Jakob Zoche, and has grown to include more than 4,300 citizens in 2007. [1] The Transnational Republic has been represented at international conferences and meetings throughout Europe, Asia, South America, and Australia.

The currency of the Transnational Republic is the "payola", which currently is valued at parity with the euro. The Transnational Republic is a member of the United Transnational Republics. Their manifesto, history, demographics, and press releases are available at their website."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transnational_Republic)


=Text=


'''MANIFESTO of The First Transnational Republic'''


"Here we are citizens, not subjects.

We, the citizens of the First TRansnational Republic, have assembled in order to globally represent our citizenship rights.

Citizens of our TRansnational Republic are not defined through blood or birthplace but through a similarity in their minds. We therefore ask every person who has an affinity to this and the following principles to join our TRansnational Republic as a free citizen.

The citizen rights include in particular the human rights, transnational principles of justice, the protection of our natural environment as well as the democratic rights of the individual.

In times of growing globalisation the problem of global representation has not yet been sufficiently addressed, the way of the world as well as the faith of the individuals are increasingly determined by transnational organisations (corporations, churches, trade organisations…). There is no comparable political representation system of the individual. The countries of this world cannot – under the influence of these transnational organisations – represent the interests of their citizens; nations cannot act transnationally.

Our aim is the recognition of the First TRansnational Republic by the international community"


=More information=

Sign-up page at https://join.utnr.org/account/signup


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]