'''Book: Transforming Power: From The Personal To The Political. by Judy Rebick. Penguin Canada, 2009'''

URL = http://www.transformingpower.ca

on the rise of networked politics

=Summary=

Jesse Hirsh:

"Judy Rebick's book Transforming Power provides both a vivid history of the social movements of the last 30 years and a framework for understanding the origins of social media. While the democratizing potential of the Internet is often alluded to, Judy demonstrates how it can manifest, by connecting the values of the online world with the movements active on the ground, all across the globe. The power of dialogue should not be underestimated, and Judy's insights demonstrate how it can be applied to all sorts of contexts, creating processes and outcomes that are both socially just and personally empowering."


=Review=

Hilary Wainright, Editor of Red Pepper:

"In Transforming Power, Judy Rebick tells the story of how, in the wake of decades of destructive politics, many new pathways of social change are being made around  the world: from small grassroots groups, to new online mobilizations, to experiments  in democratic, pluralist states; from urban USA to the Indigenous Americas.
 
As humanity confronts the greatest economic crisis in 80 years, and the ecological crisis that is he greatest challenge in history, politics as usual seem barren  and irrelevant: part of the problem to overcome, not part of the solution.
 
Judy's book is a timely intervention and will inspire new thinking and dialogue on how to build the movements and communities that will bring about the radical changes we need in our world."

 

=Excerpts=


==A New Grammar of Democracy==

From Chapter 8: Networked Politics.

Judy Rebick:

"WHILE THE NEW LEFT OF THE 1960S, feminism, and various New Age projects challenged authoritarianism, the political Left never managed to change its authoritarian and patriarchal mode of functioning. The Left believed that to be effective and take on a centralized and authoritarian power, they, too, had to concentrate power. For the social democratic Left, the pressure of the media to conform to highly managed political interventions and, eventually, to highly managed political conventions was deadly to internal party democracy. As early as 1979,  British socialist feminists were making the argument that the political Left needed to transform itself, following the example of the new social movements, most importantly the feminist movement. 

But the problem goes beyond patriarchal modes of functioning to our very notions of power. The Left has always seen power as being located in the state and in the corporations. The way to change the world was to get state power and make changes to state and economic structures. The women’s movement, anti-racist groups, and the environmental movement introduced the idea that we must also change our personal behaviour if we want to change the world. All these movements broadened the idea of politics into the realm of the personal relationships between people and the relationship between humans and the environment. Power was understood as something each of us exercises in our lives as part of a dominant group, including our human dominance over nature and its creatures. These ideas of power were influential in organizations and in community, but somehow didn’t change our ideas of political change. Today we are seeing the beginnings of that kind of change in the notions of transformative power. 


Hilary Wainwright writes in her saucy U.K. magazine Red Pepper: 

- ''Closely associated with an understanding of transformative power are the distinctive understandings of knowledge influenced by movement-based politics. In good part as a result of this politics and—not unrelated—developments in the philosophy of science, we are increasingly aware of the plural sources of knowledge: as tacit, practical and experiential as well as scientific. We are working increasingly with complexity, ambivalence and uncertainty.…
A recognition of the many perspectives from which a single phenomenon can be understood must be reclaimed as tools for analyzing and changing a complex real world.''


These new understandings of knowledge point towards an emphasis on the horizontal sharing and exchange of knowledge and collaborative attempts to build connected alternatives and shared memories. They stress the gaining of knowledge as a process of discovery and therefore see political action, the exercise of transformative power, as itself a source of knowledge, revealing unpredicted problems or opportunities. 

This recognition of the importance of experiential and practical knowledge deepens the nature of debate. It implies debate driven not so much by the struggle for positions of power as by a search for truth about the complexity of social change, a production of collaborative knowledge that itself becomes a source of power.

An early example of this kind of collaborative knowledge emerged from a decimated labour movement in the United States in the 1980s. Then president Ronald Reagan had waged a relentless attack against trade union rights that had seriously weakened not only the labour movement but the rights of workers. The mainstream labour movement was stuck in business unionism,  and unable to change its tactics to meet the new challenge coming from neo-liberalism. 

Some progressive unionists decided to take another route, going around the power of the leadership of the labour movement rather than confronting it head on. These union activists  understood that organizing the workers in the new economy—including those in precarious work, part-time and contract workers who are rarely organized—would be central to rebuilding the union movement. They also understood that making allies within the community would be the key to success. They created an organization called Jobs with Justice.

I first learned about Jobs with Justice at the World Social Forum in 2002. I noticed them because there were so few U.S. groups at that Social Forum and because they were working with some Canadian groups I knew. A few years later, at a leadership training session I attended at the Rockwood Institute, I met Sarita Gupta, who is now the executive director of Jobs with Justice. I asked her how Jobs with Justice organizes. She said,

Even though we are a national network, each of our local groups is locally autonomous. Because of our commitment to local autonomy, our national office doesn’t say “Here is the campaign that everyone is going to work on.” Our leadership has resisted the normal model of national organizations. We felt that in order to build a strong grassroots worker movement in this country, we have to make sure the organization is accountable to local struggles.
We’ve built a network that’s collaborative and not competitive because we understand that we are part of a broader movement, learning from one another. There is a big culture of peer-to-peer learning. Instead of the experts in the national office swooping in to help the national campaigns, we look to one another to help, so our coalition in Boston will help our coalition in New York City.

Our structure is hybrid. We have national stakeholders, but also each of our local coalitions have institutions around the table as a steering committee or whatever governing body works best for them. We also have activists who sign a pledge card, saying, “We are committing to be there for someone else’s struggle as well as our own at least five times in the next year.” We have a hundred thousand people who have signed these cards and are the base of mobilization. Those activists are playing a very big role in helping to organize and ensuring we are actually speaking to people.

Early on we structured it that way and resisted the notion of paid staff. Larry Cohen, who is one of our founders from the Communications Workers, said, “If we are going to do this right, then I will commit as a union that our organizers will give 10 percent of their time to helping get the coalition up and running.” This helped us resist hiring full-time staff. Now it’s twenty-one years since we were founded, and we are slowly moving toward hiring. But everything we do considers staff and volunteers. For example, we never just do training for the staff, we always include activists and community leaders, so that collective learning is happening in a cross-section, not just for the staff.

People who work with Jobs with Justice come together around an issue or set of issues and make decisions for that particular struggle. It starts at the local level, where the ongoing work takes place. Volunteers can participate at multiple levels of commitment, and decisions are made by consensus.

Like Clayton Thomas Mueller from the IEN, Gupta calls this action base-building. She explained, “People take the pledge to support others very seriously. Part of our ideology is around this movement work. We believe that through taking collective action, people are transformed, and their vision of the world or what is right or wrong changes, and their commitment changes.”..

Gupta points out that the organization is rooted in local struggles. It is at those local tables, as she calls them, that relationships are built. These relationships permit differences to be worked out. Then the national organization can help to mobilize across cities to support a particular local struggle or organize a national campaign that is supported across the board. At the moment, Jobs with Justice’s national campaigns include a push to strengthen labour laws to regain rights lost under Reagan and a demand for public health care insurance.

It makes sense that Jobs with Justice was founded by some of the organizing departments of local unions, since this locally based, relationship-building, networked approach has always been that of organizers trying to get new people involved in the union. The organizing departments of unions have always been closest to the ground and to grassroots workers. It’s not surprising, then, that Jobs with Justice, a new kind of labour organization that works with the unions, is at the same time outside of them, working with the community. 

Given the failure of the Left, the labour movement, and the social movements to creatively resist neo-liberalism, it makes sense that when a new generation emerged to fight corporate globalization, they created horizontal structures and demonstrated an abhorrence of any kind of top-down leadership. In the demonstrations against the various summits of the WTO, FTAA, G8, and the rest of the alphabet soup of global-governance institutions, young demonstrators set up affinity groups and spoke circles  that made decision by consensus. 

These affinity groups have morphed into a new kind of movement politics that is most advanced in Europe. It is called networked politics, and it is tremendously effective in a number of ways. Many of the most visible protests in Europe, such as the Spanish response to the 2004 Madrid subway bombings, the rebellion of immigrant youth in the suburbs of Paris in 2005, and the mass upsurge in France in 2006 against a new employment bill that discriminated against young workers, were all organized through informal networks. When formally organized political forces wanted to set up a coordinating body in Spain to institutionalize these semi-spontaneous uprisings, none of the young people involved were interested. Not only do these groups resist any kind of formal structure, they also opt out of the corporate global media system by refusing to have identifiable leaders or spokespeople.

Jeff Juris, an American activist and academic from this new generation, explains “that none of these practices or ideas are necessarily new; these discussions go back to the debate in the early part of the twentieth century about different kinds of organization [between anarchists and socialists]. But technology facilitates more decentralized practices, and allows for scalability. In the debate between vertical and horizontal forms, the horizontal forms perhaps have more of an advantage than they used to, so they are diffusing relatively widely.”

The World Social Forum is probably the largest and most complex political network in the world. Its Charter of Principles contains three principles of horizontality. One is respect for diversity that not only values and celebrates political, social, and cultural diversity but sees the need to constantly extend the network to new actors. The second principle is that no individual or organization can speak in the name of the network. People may speak for themselves or for their own organizations, but no one speaks for the WSF. The third has to do with the inevitable decision-making process that comes from this form of organization, and it insists on consensus. 
Before you roll your eyes and say that this could never work on a large scale considering the complexity of modern society, we should look at a very similar network that has taken on mighty Microsoft and produced an amazingly successful computer operating system, as well as numerous programs that many believe are of much higher quality than the corporate product. Open source software functions like a network, in many ways similar to the World Social Forum. 

The open source system, also called Linux, was created by Linus Torvalds, whose approach has been characterized as “release [program codes] early and release often; delegate everything you can; be open to the point of promiscuity.” In theory, this could result in products and projects that were chaotic and contradictory. However, Linux competes successfully with Microsoft, which is based on the old proprietary methods, and continues to grow. 

Contributors to open source projects are motivated by the challenge of writing new code, building on the creativity of others, and the chance to act as partners in the project, rather than by personal financial gain. Challenge and the opportunity to collaborate must be available before a person can start an open source project, or a project founded on the open source model. While people pursue their individual interests, they are doing so while promoting the good of all. Thus, while each person is actually following his or her own agenda, the end result also benefits everyone else involved. In a way, open source turns the neo-liberal ideal of self-interest as a motivating force for the market on its head, liberating the creativity of each individual but in the context of a collective project, in which sharing knowledge and building on the knowledge of others becomes the goal—rather than profit and competition. 
This is a particularly exciting idea, because one of the acknowledged strengths of capitalism is its capacity for innovation, and we are always told that money must be the motivating force for that innovation. Open source proves that challenge—rather than money—can be the motivating force for innovation.

The metaphor of “open source” is also becoming a key element in the new ideas about democracy. The code is legible, transparent, and open. It can be modified by anyone and favours individual autonomy, participation, and control over giving power to a representative or a particular group. Openness, as an ethical principle, also refers to reciprocal listening, communication, connectivity, and inclusion.

Jai Sen, a veteran activist from India who is theorizing this idea of open space, says, 

The central idea here is that an open space, rather than a party or movement, allows for more and different forms of relations among political actors, while remaining open-ended with respect to outcomes. It is open in that encounters among multiple subjects with diverse objectives can have transformative political effects that traditional forms of movements, coalitions, and campaigns, with uniform themes and goals, exclude. By the name itself, it also seems to offer scope for a much wider range of actors to take part and contribute, including those not necessarily involved with politics or movement; so it is more inclusive. 

Of course, neither the software movement nor the anti-globalization movement lives up to these ideals, but both demonstrate that individuals and groups working together as equals, without power being distributed in a hierarchical way, can be very effective at producing the results that the group desires…
Lawrence Cox, an Irish activist and sociologist, said that we must redefine the way we see power itself. Instead of seeing it as located in the state or in the corporation, we have to see power as something in all of our relationships. “Then every single movement we do is a laboratory in which we are experimenting with the grammar of democracy. If we get together in a circle and balance the presence of women and men, we are somehow thinking about how the future grammar of democracy will be.”

This is an exciting idea, because it means each of us can change the theory and practice of democracy through how we interact in our organizations.

Thomas Paine, a father of the American Revolution and an important democratic theorist, pointed out in his 1792 essay The Rights of Man: 

It appears to general observation, that revolutions create genius and talents; but those events do no more than bring them forward. There exists in man [sic], a mass of sense lying in a dormant state, and which, unless something excites it to action, will descend with him, in that condition to the grave. As it is to the advantage of society that the whole of its faculties should be employed, the construction of government ought to be able as such to bring forward, by a quiet and regular operation, all that extent of capacity which never fails to appear in revolutions. 

Perhaps the young activists across Europe and North America are practicing a form of democracy, which, while short of revolution, does manage to liberate the genius and talents in ordinary people by using open space, horizontal structures, and self-organization. The question is how does this liberation of human potential interact with existing power structures to transform them?...

The Obama campaign used the principles of networked politics both to fundraise and to organize. The most sophisticated online fundraising operation in the world, www.moveon.org, was assisting him, and obviously he has brilliant online strategists from the generation that grew up with networking online. While the campaign machine itself was probably organized in a fairly traditional, professional, top-down manner, they were organizing a grassroots campaign. If you signed up as a volunteer, you could get a list of phone numbers of people to call and a script of what to say. No one monitored what you were doing; you didn’t have to join the Democratic Party to do it or go to a meeting to be trained. They just assumed that if you supported Barack Obama and wanted to volunteer time, then they wanted you involved.

That’s it. Anyone who got that email could host a meeting for Barack Obama. Just like the Sud étudiants in France, the IEN, or Jobs with Justice, the Obama campaign provided the tools and resources and left it up to the individual to handle the meeting. That kind of confidence in supporters is rarely seen in a traditional campaign, in which control over the message and the campaign is of paramount importance. 

It wasn’t just online that this open friendly approach governed the campaign.  According to an October 8 article in his blog on Huffington Post, electoral campaign expert Zack Exley explains the genius of the Obama campaign was in combining the openness of networked politics with the a sophisticated electoral machine. “The Obama campaign is the first in the Internet era to realize the dream of a disciplined, volunteer-driven, bottom-up-AND-top-down, distributed and massively scaleable organizing campaign, “ writes Exley. Instead of staff recruiting volunteers to knock on doors, they spent their time identifying volunteer team leaders and training them to organize others thus vastly increasing the volunteer operation on the ground.  The slogan of the organizing campaign was “Respect Empower Include,”  

Jeremy Bird, the Ohio general election director and one of the driving forces behind making teams a national strategy, said, "We decided in terms of timeline that [our organizers] would not be measured by the amount of voter contacts they made in the summer—but instead by the number of volunteers that they were recruiting, training and testing. ..Regional Field Director for Southwest Ohio, Christen Linke Young  said, "I feel like people are committing more time this election because there's a community thing going on, and they're part of something that's local and social. But we're also more effective at harnessing volunteers because the teams do a lot of the training and debriefing themselves—it scales well. Everyone who goes out canvassing comes back with at least one story of someone they impacted. The team leaders are trained to give people time to tell those stories, and so everyone gets a sense of progress and they learn from each other how to be more effective next time."

But when the openness of the Obama campaign met the vicious attacks of the McCain campaign, they were forced to a certain degree back into the old model of the battle of titans.  Nevertheless, they kept the positive message and the friendly open approach to their supporters right up until election day…

Internet expert Jesse Hirsch says the Obama campaign will transform electoral politics in the same way as the Kennedy-Nixon debate, which marked the moment that television took over electoral campaigns. 
The challenge is to figure out how the networked politics approach can impact on the hierarchical institutions that have most of the power in our society. Open source shows that on the economic and creative level, networks have as good or better outcomes than hierarchy. Obama shows that introducing even an element of networked politics into a highly structured political system can vastly increase people’s participation and the campaign’s creativity. 

Recognizing the weaknesses of networked politics does not in any way take away from its considerable strengths. It is the network with roots in the ground, on which any lasting transformation of power will take place." 


==Is the Party Over?==

From chapter 13.


Judy Rebick:

"One of the most interesting electoral experiences happened recently in Spain, where a right-wing government’s attempts to pin the Madrid subway bombings on ETA (a nationalist group in the Basque country) stimulated a massive response from a network of grassroots organizations that basically threw the government out of office. 
In a poll three days before the election in March 2004, the right-wing Popular Party had a majority. On March 11, thirteen bombs exploded on three suburban trains. Two hundred people were killed and fourteen hundred injured. Activists worried that if it were re-elected, the government would use the bombing as an excuse to repress all radical opposition—as they saw happen in the United States after September 11. The next day the government called a demonstration against terrorism that brought seven million people out into the streets. But instead of supporting the government, the protestors bore banners reading “Who did it? We want to know.” The ETA denied responsibility, but the government kept insisting.

That day, the networks that had mobilized against the war in Iraq issued a call for cacerolazos, or pot banging demonstrations, for Saturday, March 13, under the slogans “The dead are ours. The wars are yours!,” “PP [Popular Party] murders,” “Franco’s sons,” “No to government disinformation.” The cacerolazos were built almost entirely through cell-phone messaging. For every text message received, ten or twenty were sent out. These went beyond the usual activist communications to their families, workplaces, and places of study. One of the activists, Mayo Fuster Morell, reported in the online Mute Magazine: “Everywhere the bleep of SMS messages announced the latest news that spread from mouth to mouth through the crowd.… No flags, parties. Leaders, organizers, or orders. Participation is horizontal, spontaneous, and massive. A video is aired in which a group close to Al Qaeda claims responsibility for the attack, but none of the official media reports it.” 

Realizing it was in trouble, the government tried to get the Electoral Council to delay the election, claiming that the demonstrations were illegally organized by the Socialist Party. The Electoral Council refused, and the result was a massive turnout in the election and the defeat of the Popular Party. “They now know,” wrote Mayo, “that, in forty-eight hours, a people can overturn any government.”

Young people with little interest in electing the Socialist Party just decided that it was critically important to defeat the PP and took advantage of a highly mobilized population and a terrible error on the part of the government to defeat them. A large number of youth also mobilized in France during the last election, although they did not manage to defeat the Right. And, of course, an even greater number of young people are mobilizing through the Obama campaign in the U.S. elections. In all these cases, the method of participation in the election campaign is quite different than we have seen before—a different way of doing politics.

At the beginning of the last election in Canada, Jack Layton and Stephen Harper refused to accept the participation of Green Party leader Elizabeth May in the televised leaders’ debate, even though her party was running about 10 percent in the polls and, through recruiting a sitting independent, had an MP. What followed was no less than a national cross-partisan uprising, demanding that she be included. Layton backed down after it became clear the issue was not going away, and then Harper backed down, and May was included. This kind of citizen activism, which is greatly facilitated by the Web, may in fact be a new way to force changes on political parties. In the Canadian election, climate change groups posted sophisticated websites suggesting strategic voting (for the progressive party most likely to win) in swing ridings. It is difficult to say if this had a major impact on the vote, but it was a major part of discussion during the elections. There was also a groundswell of support for some kind of coalition among centre-left and left-wing parties to stop a very right-wing Conservative government. If the New Politics Initiative had succeeded and the Greens and NDP had merged, there might have been an electoral breakthrough for the Left in an election in which the Liberals were particularly weak and the majority of electorate were opposed to the ruling Conservatives. In Canada’s undemocratic first past the post system, the Conservatives won a substantial minority even though more than two-thirds of the electorate voted against them.

IN BOLIVIA, the state is very weak because decades of opposition by social movements have succeeded in bringing down government after government. It was this dead end that convinced the indigenous movements that they needed their own political instrument. In some ways it is easier for the MAS (Movement Towards Socialism, led by Evo Morales) to make dramatic changes, but still those changes are being stymied, either by pre-existing laws or by the opposition of the Right.

Created as a political instrument of the social movements, the MAS is not a political party like the others. Candidates are selected in mass assemblies of all those involved in indigenous social organizations. Anyone who is active in one of these social organizations is automatically a member of the MAS. There is tremendous polarization, both in the Congress and the Constituent Assembly, because the changes being proposed involve nothing less than re-founding the country on a new—in Evo Morales’s words—“anti-neo-liberal, anti-colonial basis.” So the minority that benefits from the status quo is fighting like hell to keep their power, which makes consensus-building exceedingly hard outside the MAS itself. Nevertheless, Morales has been attempting to use these methods to find compromise and to solve some seemingly unmanageable problems. 

While it is hard to imagine a political situation like the one in Bolivia developing in an advanced capitalist country, we can learn some lessons from this experience and from that of Venezuela. The first is that change will not happen only from taking state power. Power is something that has to be built. As Hilary Wainwright says in an article on rethinking political parties:  “In general terms one can say that the goal must move from winning the power to govern for the people paternalistically to being a struggle in collaboration with organized citizens to change political institutions from sources of domination to resources for transformation.”

One example of how this could happen is a citizen’s group called the Guelph Civic League in the small Ontario city of Guelph that tapped into just this approach before the last municipal election. Instead of taking the usual citizens’ watchdog role, they decided to ask their neighbours what they valued in their city. Starting with a survey of ten thousand citizens, they developed a list of five values that the people of Guelph supported. They then circulated those values in brochures, saying, “This is what your neighbours think.” In the summer leading up to the election, they hired a handful of students to go door-to-door discussing those values. They found people who were willing to run on these values, and let their neighbours know who they were. These candidates won nine out of ten seats on the city council, and they increased voter turnout from 30 percent to 50 percent. It was a simple switch. Instead of telling voters what the candidate thought, it asked voters what they thought and then found candidates who reflected that thinking. Today the Civic League continues its work by reporting back to voters about how their representatives have supported the values that were adopted. In addition, they are working with other municipal activists to share ideas and develop new strategies for engaging residents in civic government at the municipal level. There are no political parties in Ontario operating at the municipal level, which means citizen groups can relate more directly with politicians, thus avoiding the organizational structure of the party.

As we discussed in Chapter 8, Barack Obama is involving individuals in his campaign in an unprecedented, decentralized, networked manner, There is already discussion about how to  to make sure that Obama is accountable to them. It will be up to the myriad of social movements in the United States to keep up the pressure on Obama, perhaps accessing this network, to construct the kind of inclusive, democratic, and compassionate society he is talking about in the campaign. 

Using the extraordinarily democratic moment of the primary campaign to mobilize millions of people, Obama actually used the impact of these new voters to pressure the party brass to support him, defeating Hillary Clinton in one of the most dramatic examples of grassroots democracy we have seen in electoral politics. It is precisely this kind of dynamic that Lula’s foreign affairs adviser Marco Aurelio Garcia is talking about. For a party to stay true to its vision and resist the numerous pressures imposed on it by the electoral system and capital, it needs pressure from outside that system. For years, I thought that social movements could provide that pressure, and certainly, where they are strong enough—as with the landless movement (MST) in Brazil or the women’s movement at certain points in Canadian politics—that works, but can we structure a participatory system that keeps that pressure on all the time?
Spontaneous online discussions throughout the Canadian election had an impact on the media and the politicians, and while it is hard to argue that these discussions shaped the campaign, they certainly influenced it. On the other hand, the focus on the leader has never been greater and the inability of electoral politics to solve anything has never been clearer. The Wall Street collapse fell in the middle of the Canadian and U.S. elections. If elections worked as the democratic moment they should be, there would have been a thoroughgoing and deep discussion of the alternative solutions to the crisis. Instead in Canada, the major discussion was about whether the government should react to the crisis at all, and in the United States, there was more focus on Joe the Plumber, a voter who was critical of Obama’s tax policy, than there was on alternative visions for solving the economic crisis. 

The gap between horizontal networked politics and the North American elections campaigns of 2008 seems like a chasm. Yet the Obama campaign continued to use networking to mobilize new voters and there seemed to be more online citizen organizing in Canada than ever before. In a nationally televised speech before the US election, Barack Obama promised to involve Americans in their democracy again.  Of course he has already done that not only through unprecedented voter turnout but through the masses of people engaged in the election itself. How he will do that once he is elected remains to be seen.

The philosophy behind networked politics suggests that the very idea of representation is problematic. Once again I turn to the discussions at the networked politics seminar in Berlin in 2007. At the end of the three-day seminar we tried to summarize what was discussed. Some of the key questions were how parties that aspire to use a horizontal logic can engage with institutions based on a representative one. We noted that representatives are almost always absorbed by the institution to which they are elected or appointed, and rarely continue to be accountable to those who elected them. Ideas that were floated included sharing the role of representative so that no one person accumulates personal power. One example of this is the role of the Zapatista’s Marcos. Because he is masked and therefore anonymous, different people can play the role of Marcos. It is hard to imagine how this tactic could work in the media-driven politics of the Global North, but the idea of rotating representatives or using people who are not professional politicians to represent their communities for a shorter period of time, as in the participatory budget, might work. The problem here is the need for expertise to deal with the institutions of power effectively. It is a difficult problem that requires a lot more practice and study. 

Another tough question we discussed was how social movements interconnect with institutions of power without being absorbed or co-opted by them. One strategy, as discussed earlier, is to create alternative self-governing structures next to the hierarchical representative ones and, over time, the more effective, more democratic methods of governance will win out. Ideally, it should work, but in practice power reproduces itself, and it is rare for any institution or even organization to change its culture without a major battle or a collapse. 


A more realistic approach was suggested in the final report to the Berlin group: 

- ''Another way of thinking about it is related to a viral logic, to an idea of exploding this radical distinction between us and them. Then the question is how can this logic of horizontal networking migrate into the logic of state institutions themselves? This is a fundamental but unexplored question which points away from the either/or of the past: either protesting against the state or making demands on it; either taking over the state or creating an alternative. For example, what would a political party look like if it wasn’t based on a hierarchical list of candidates, or a hierarchical electoral mechanism?''


We have more questions than answers when it comes to political parties, but certainly some of the new ways of organizing at the community and social-movement levels that are discussed in this book can give us some creative ideas about how this might happen. Who would have predicted the more than 100 percent increase in voter turnout in the 2008 U.S. primaries? Who would have thought that a campaign could raise more money in small donations online than from all the powerful political action committees that run U.S. politics? We make the road by walking, and the road to political power that will benefit the majority of people is, like every other journey, begun with the first steps. 

All of the elements of the movements we have been looking at in these pages will be necessary to transform the current political system. Like every other progressive social change in history, it starts with ordinary people longing for change, and then coming together to imagine it and work for it. And in working for it , learning with honesty and courage from the experiences – including the defeats and difficulties - of those who have done the same. You may say that I’m a dreamer, but as you have read in these pages, I am far from the only one."


See also: http://www.rabble.ca/books/reviews/politics-pack-more-punch

=Bio=

"Judy Rebick is a long-time Canadian activist and founder of rabble.ca.  In this her fourth book, she explains how globalization and new communication technology are revolutionizing our understanding of power and producing profound new ideas and practices of social and political life.  Judy is currently holds the CAW Sam Gindin Chair in Social Justice and Democracy at Ryerson University in Toronto and writes political blog at www.transformingpower.ca"


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Movements]]