'''* Article: A Prolegomenon to Transversal Geophilosophy. By Hwa Yol Jung. Environmental Philosophy Vol. 10, No. 1, Special Issue: East Asian and Comparative Approaches to the Environment (Spring 2013), pp. 83-112 (30 pages)'''

URL = https://www.jstor.org/stable/26169778


=Abstract=

"This essay proposes the idea of transversal geophilosophy as ultima philosophia to save the earth. Geophilosophy is that philosophical discipline which embraces all matters of the earth as a whole. Since it requires global efforts on all fronts, it is necessarily cross-cultural, cross-speciesistic, and cross-disciplinary, that is, geophilosophy is transversal. It attends especially to the importance of '''Sinism, which incorporates Confucianism, Daoism, and Chan/Zen Buddhism''', in constructing an ethico-aesthetic paradigm. Sinism is a species of '''relational ontology or philosophy of Interbeing''' which defines reality as social process, that is, in the cosmos everything is connected to everything else or nothing exists in isolation, that coincides with the "first law" of ecology. Not only is the aesthetic a discourse of the body, but also the body is our anchorage in the world. In Sinism, the aesthetic and the ethical come together in the embodied concept of harmony, which is the master keyboard, as it were, they are being played together: what is harmonious is simultaneously beautiful and ethical, which culminates in the cosmopolitan virtue of ren. Today we must walk tomorrow as well as yesterday: we steop backward in order to step forward. The Way (Dao) of Ecopiety is to be had in part by recycling the ancient wisdom of Sinism instead of abandoning it as old and foreign."

[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Global Governance]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]
[[Category:China]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Cosmobiological]]