'''= open source 'vedic' approach, from David Bruce Hughes'''

URL = http://www.transontology.org/

=Description=

"Transontology is a new technology of consciousness enhancement based on the ancient Esoteric Teaching of the Sanskrit Vedas. It was carefully handed down for over 5,000 years as a secretive religious teaching. Transontology demystifies and open-sources this powerful technology so that everyone can benefit from it, and interested professionals can develop new problem-solving applications in their areas of interest and expertise."


=Discussion=


==Open Source Vedas==

David Bruce Hughes:

"Previous versions of Vedic teachings available in the West have been cripple-ware: deliberately distorted and incomplete copies of the original. The original source code and more powerful methods have been kept secret by esoteric traditions. Transontology provides the original, complete source code and integrated development environment to the public for the first time.

Like any software environment, Transontology has two aspects: as a tool for development of new applications, and as the applications themselves. The development tool is suited for psychologists and holistic health professionals, and the applications are for their clients to use and benefit from.

What does Transontology do? Like any programming language or software environment, it facilitates the development of applications. What kind of applications? That is an open question, limited only by the imagination and ingenuity of the developer. Mental therapy and problem-solving are only partial aspects of the possibilities inherent in Transontology. Increasing the human potential for happiness, creativity and productivity is an unlimited field. It will be interesting to see what kind of applications imaginative people create, once they have access to the tools to enhance their consciousness in effective and novel ways.

The traditional model for religious and spiritual technologies has been closed and proprietary. The most powerful technologies are kept secret, limited to an initiated priesthood or inner circle. Development of new applications is prohibited or heavily controlled.

Recent trends in computer software and publishing have shown that the value of a technology increases dramatically when it is shared openly among a network of users or consumers. This increase of value multiplies exponentially when development tools and source code are also shared openly. Open-source distribution enables many contributors to enhance the value of the technology and develop new applications, often beyond the vision of the technology’s originators.

Transontology applies the open-source distribution and development model to an ancient spiritual technology for the first time. By making the development tools and applications available freely to everyone, we open the ancient esoteric teachings to a much wider audience and increase their value to society through community participation.

Everyone needs ontology. An ontology is simply a reality map: a conceptual guide to categories of being or reality. Ontologies usually take the form of a collection of data and stories that help us model life, the universe and everything. We all use ontologies to evaluate the meaning of our experience.

Ontology saves time and effort. By providing a collection of ready-made evaluations we can apply to common experiences, ontologies save us the trouble of reconsidering and reinterpreting the meaning of everything each time we encounter it. Without ontology we would have to evaluate each experience as if seeing it for the first time.

Familiar examples of ontologies are dictionaries and encyclopedias, religions and cultures, arts and sciences, languages and other systems of meaning and value, representation and communication. Everyone needs, has and uses ontologies, whether they realize it or not.

Ontologies are valuable in practical matters. If we are playing music, for example, we can think in the language or ontology of music. Thus, instead of having to reinvent the laws of harmony, scales and rhythm each time we play, we simply reference the ontology of the particular style of music we are playing.

Transcendental ontology or transontology is a special type of ontology that describes transcendental objects and phenomena. Are you conscious? Then you are a transcendental entity, and as such, to understand yourself requires transontology.

Ordinary materialistic ontology and logic cannot account for transcendental phenomena such as consciousness, individuality, personality, desire, choice, intention, initiative, imagination, creativity, love and other human qualities we experience every day.

Transontology is rare because most ontologies are developed to support materialistic ways of looking at the world. Transontology helps us correctly evaluate the immanence of spirit, consciousness and the inner life of the soul.

Transontology is important because it is the only way of giving appropriate meaning to the transcendental aspects of human consciousness, experience and life.

To understand ourselves as spiritual beings, make tangible advancement in spiritual life and develop our consciousness, we need to learn transontology and apply it in our lives."
(http://www.transontology.org/)


==Authoritarian aspects of Transontology==

The Cult Education Forum reports a very autocratic conception at work within the movement, and quotes the leader David Bruce Hughes, which shows an Authority Ranking principle at work based on a presumption of knowing the Truth, based on their own interpretation of the meaning of the Vedas, which is derived from the Hare Krhsna movement:

“All of your questions and much, much more are answered in Bhagavad-Gita; As It Is. But your posts reveal that even if you have read it as you claim, you have not understood it at all. Otherwise you would not say so many confused and ignorant things. Let me just highlight one example out of many: “A very important thing I want to tell, is I see myself equal to everybody, and doesn’t put myself higher or lower to another!”

You cannot be equal to everyone: there will always be superior and inferior men. Just like when you are in school, there are students in higher grades and others in lower grades. In whatever way you measure, there will always be people better than you and less than you. The only way we are equal is in our spiritual potential, but even then there are enormous differences in how well we have realized that potential.”
(http://forum.rickross.com/read.php?12,60992,61007)




=More Information=

* Book via http://content.esotericteaching.org/books/Transontology.pdf; [http://www.esotericteaching.org/home/books/683-transontology Foreword]


[[Category:India]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]