
=Discussion=

Hanzi Freinacht:

"The French philosopher Deleuze proposes that we should see society as made up by dividuals, i.e. that we all are in fact part of one another and affect one another. We consist of many different influences, roles and perspectбґives, within a multitude of contexts.

I am offering a related bid for anti-individualism: the transбґpersonal perбґspecбґtбґive. The transpersonal perspective holds two seemingly opposed, but in reality complementary, positions.

The first position is to see society as determined by the deep, inner lives Б─⌠ the most personal relations and tender emotions Б─⌠ of human beings. This takes the unique lived experience of each human being very seriously. Such lived experiбґence is taken to be the very foundation of socбґiety: if there is anger or love in our hearts, if there is peace in our minds, and if all manner of psychological issues have been properly dealt with. Such things determine if we turn out engaged world citizens, mindбґless conбґsumers or bitter reactionбґaries.

The second position is that this deeply human and personal experience is in turn created by societal processes that are largely invisible to each single person, and accessбґible only through a profound and systematic sociological and psychological analyбґsis of society.

So this lands us in an apparent paradox: to really see the singular humбґan being, to really respect her rights and uniqueness, we must go beyond the idea of the individual; we must see through it and strive to see how society is preбґsent within each single person as well as in the relationships through which she is born as a Б─°selfБ─². We go from the idea of the individбґual (vs. Б─°the collectбґiveБ─²), to simбґply seeing society as an evolving, interбґlinked set of transindiviбґduals. This is the transpersonal perspective. ItБ─≥s not just that we are each a billiard ball that Б─°interactsБ─² with other people. We co-emerge. Or, as the physicist-philosopher Karen Barad has put it: we intra-act.

Initially, it may seem counter-intuitive to think of humans as someбґthing other than individuals: after all, donБ─≥t we all have one body each, one voice and one inner monologue? But even neuroscience challenges this assumption. Ever heard of what is popularly called Б─°split-brainБ─²? It occurs in rare cases when the bridge between the left and right hemiбґspheres of the brain is surgiбґcally removed to treat severe epilepsy. People with Б─°split-brainБ─² show a numбґber of deeply puzzling features; they appear to have two different selves, each contбґrollбґing one side of the body. Someбґtimes these two sides work past one another, the conscious mind (or rather: the linguistically endowed Б─°talkingБ─² mind of the dominant hemiбґsphere) even making excuses and rationalizations for the behaviors of the ghostly left hand which seems to gain a will of its own.

Or, you can show a picture to one eye and not the other Б─⌠ and the split-brain person will act as if he has seen the picture. But if you ask him, he is still unaware of having seen the picture and gives rationalizations for why he acted as if he had seen the picture. What you can see here is that the brain becomes split in half, and each part seems to have a mind of its own Б─⌠ although someбґtimes the two communicate indirectly. This truly is bizarre, at least from a perspective where humans are thought to have an individual self and will of their own.

Or you may have heard of the cranially conjoined child twins (meanбґing that their heads are partly physically merged into one) from Vanбґcouver, Krista and Tatiana Hogan, who seem to be able to pass visual impressбґions to one another directбґly through their brains: you can ask one girl what the other sees and she will know. Such cases make the reality of the dividual clearly apparent: the single human mind is not indivisible, not a Б─°single atomБ─². ItБ─≥s just not; not even biologically speaking. But these unбґcomбґmбґon cases serve only to underscore something more fundamental that involves all of us: nowhere can you find a single, individual Б─°selfБ─²; itБ─≥s always connected to everyбґбґthing around us.

To the metamodern activist, the rights and interests of the transбґindivбґidбґual are seen as much deepбґer, more real and more important than the rights of the individual. Just like modern society scrapped the rights of the clan or the family in favor of the individual, we are now scrapping the indivбґiбґdual in favor of the much more morally entitled and more analyбґticбґally valid transбґindividбґual.

The idea of the listening society serves the transбґindividual: the human being is seen as more than a unique, separate life story. The idea of the transбґindividual sees the human being as inseparable from her language, her deep unconscious, her relations, roles, societal positions, values, emoбґtions, developбґmental psychology, biologбґical organism and so forth. Each human being is viewed as an open and social process, a whirlwind of parбґticipation and co-creation of society. Socбґiety as a whole is viewed as a self-organizing system which creates such transбґindividuals who are in turn able to recreate society.

To sum up, the idea of the individual and her rights and freedom has served us well, but now we need to move on Б─⌠ lest society come crashing down on us like London Bridge.

Metamodern politics, working from sincere irony, applies a transбґpersбґonal perspective to society, serving the transбґindividual, her rights and interбґests. You can use the words transpersonalism and transindividualism more or less interchangeably. Just remember this: It is by looking at deep psychological issues, the inner development of each of us, and how such properties are generated within society, that we address the core of societyБ─≥s problems. (In the appendix of my book you will find some more condenбґsed definitions of what the transpersonal perspective means.)"
(https://metamoderna.org/death-to-the-individual/)

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]