
=Discussion=

Arran Gare:

"The failure of the New Left as a movement and the rise of neoliberalism was
not the end of the New Left as an intellectual movement, however, although it greatly
thinned their ranks. Many members of the movement accepted their defeat and
abandoned all attempts to envisage a better world. They gave up on utopia, and as
Russell Jacoby put it, embraced myopia (1999, pp.101-124). Some focused on their
careers in academia, becoming “professional philosophers,” either promoting
mainstream analytic philosophy or deconstructive postmodernism, which really
meant contributing to the subversion of philosophy. 

Others turned to identity politics, which really meant an abandonment of the quest for universal justice and the mobilization of different groups to assert themselves to gain more power within the existing order. 

Identity politics was often associated with the defence of multiculturalism. As opposed to the transculturalism practiced by the theoretical biologist, sinologist, and philosopher Joseph Needham, based on the assumption that diverse cultures can both learn from and provide critical perspectives on each other,
multiculturalism leaves people to simply assert their own cultural values against others. Transculturalism advances dialogue; multiculturalism precludes it. 

However, the growing environmental crisis was evidence that the New Left were right in seeing
something very fundamentally wrong with the civilization of modernity dominated
by the logic of markets and instrumental reasoning, and right to argue for the
subordination of markets to principles of justice."

(https://www.cckp.space/single-post/bp-4-2021-arran-gare-against-posthumanism-posthumanism-as-the-world-vision-of-house-slaves)

[[Category:Culture]]
[[Category:Cosmobiological]]
[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]