
'''* Book: FERRER, JORGE N. (2022). Love and Freedom: Transcending Monogamy and Polyamory. London, UK: Rowman & Littlefield.'''

URL = 

=Contents=

Source: The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 2021, Vol. 53, No. 2

Marie Thouin:

"The book opens with a well-documented description of the age-old, yet
increasingly relevant quandary around the paradoxical human needs for longterm bonding and sexual variety, as well as the pervasive role that mononormativity
or monocentrism (i.e., the assumption that monogamy, either lifelong or serial, is
the only valid relational model for healthy romantic relationship) has played within
these conversations.

Holding a hopeful lens to this loaded topic, Ferrer proposes that the difficulties
plaguing traditional marriage today, such as sky-high divorce and affairs rates,
might not be all bad—and that in fact, they may be guiding us to a brighter future
where love and intimacy can bloom in more diverse, more authentic, and less
oppressive ways. 


To this end, he asks:

What if, rather than trying to conform to outmoded or inadequate relational
structures, people boldly cocreate intimate lives more attuned to their essential
dispositions, changing needs, and deepest desires? What if we exorcise the
monocentric spell and realize that ‘‘the problem’’ might not be, after all, a
problem? (p. 2)


To which he suggests the following thesis:

Behind the inability to exclusively commit to a single person for life or an
indefinite period of time, there may be emerging wisdom at play. In other words,
some of the fears, conflicts, and challenges modern individuals experience in
monogamous pledges may arise from an often-unconscious discernment of that
relational structure as no longer appropriate for their personal development or
even for our culture’s historical moment. (p. 2)


To look at intimate relationships free from normativity or ideological orthodoxy
first requires an understanding of the different sources of conditioning that limit
both the imagination and the real-life possibilities when it comes to intimacy. This
task is undertaken in Chapter 1, ‘‘Relational Freedom and the Crisis of Modern
Relationships,’’ where Ferrer describes six main sources of conditioning at play
around relationships: evolutionary, biological, historical, cultural, social, and
biographical. He also introduces the conception of relational freedom, as a person’s
ability to choose intimate relationship styles and configurations based on personal
growth and mutual care, rather than on conditioned forces and relational ideologies.
While Ferrer denounces mononormativity as impinging upon what should be the
fundamental human right of loving ‘‘as many people as one desires in constructive,
nonharmful ways’’ (p. 4), he also supports ‘‘mindful monogamy’’ (p. 2) as a
legitimate relationship choice when it is chosen outside of monocentric pressures
and rejects hierarchies between relationship styles.

Ferrer’s analysis of these hierarchies is deepened in the following chapter,
‘‘Mononormativity, Polypride, and the ‘Mono–Poly Wars’.’’ While
mononormativity is the dominant paradigm across modern Western countries,
emerging sub-cultures around polyamory and consensual nonmonogamy (CNM)
often describe monogamous relating as inferior, unhealthy, or otherwise deficient—
leading to a ‘‘predicament of mutual competition and condescension among
monogamists and polyamorists’’ (p. 38). Ferrer critiques both forms of relational
normativity—monopride/polyphobia and polypride/monophobia—and
demonstrates the need to look at relationships beyond both monocentrism and
emerging polynormativities. He shows, using a review of the empirical literature on
the psychological health and relationship quality of monogamous and polyamorous
individuals and couples, the ideological nature of these wars—and that no one side
is more ‘‘correct’’ than the other.

The next chapter, ‘‘Sympathetic Joy: Beyond Jealousy, Toward Relational
Freedom’’ focuses on one of the most prominent roadblocks to achieving
relational freedom: romantic jealousy. Because the experience of jealousy
‘‘ensures the supremacy of monogamy and monogamous love [serving] a
property-owning patriarchal culture’’ (Tsoulis, 1987, p. 25) and commonly
affects CNM relationships as well, Ferrer argues, ‘‘the pursuit of relational
freedom requires a new approach to jealousy’’ (p. 61). To this end, Ferrer explores
how the application of mudita, the Buddhist contemplative practice of sympathetic
joy, to intimate relationships can transform jealousy and expand relational choices.
According to Ferrer, the transformation of jealousy into compersion—a term that
was coined in CNM contexts to describe empathic joy (for a review of literature on
compersion, see Thouin-Savard [2021])—can show that ‘‘several forms of
relationship may be spiritually wholesome (in the Buddhist sense of leading to
liberation) according to various human dispositions and contextual situations’’ (p.
76).

Chapter 4, ‘‘The Dawn of Transbinary Relationships,’’ is where the most
unprecedented contribution of the book lies. Ferrer elaborates on the conceptual
and experiential territory beyond the non/monogamy system and proposes a
navigational map. In the same way that transgender and gender diversity
movements opened possibilities of expression beyond the male/female binary,
transbinary relationship styles introduce the space beyond the mono/poly binary.
To this end, he proposes three plural relational modes—fluidity, hybridity, and
transcendence—and describes several transbinary pathways (e.g., developmental,
contextual, intrapersonal, transcategorical) that may take place within each mode.
He then coins the term novogamy to refer to the ‘‘fuzzy, liminal, and multivocal
semantic–existential space’’ (p. 82) beyond the mono/poly binary. Finally, he
addresses the concern that transbinary relationship modes may lead to a lack of
coherent identity by arguing that ‘‘by more fully embracing their inner diversity,
complexity, and dynamism, people can foster their personal individuation’’ (p.
103).

In the final chapter, ‘‘Relational Freedom and the Transformation of Intimate
Relationships,’’ Ferrer considers ‘‘the future of romance after the deconstruction of
the belief in a single ‘soul mate’,’’ and proposes that ‘‘romantic love can stay
perfectly alive—and perhaps even more freely flourish—outside patriarchal and
monocentric dungeons’’ (p. 107). He proposes new criteria for evaluating romantic
relationships as alternatives to the standard of relationship longevity, and instead
suggests ‘‘emancipatory, healing, and transformational relationship standards in
relation to both individuals and societies’’ (p. 107). The chapter closes with a
discussion of social justice, privilege, and collective responsibility, admitting that
‘‘social locations drastically impact the degree of relational freedom available to
different populations’’ (p. 114) and that exercising relational freedom ‘‘must be
balanced with a caring awareness and examination of the impact of one’s choices
on others—no matter how ‘right’ or ‘truthful’ a decision may feel for any
individual’’ (p. 118)."


=Review=

Source: The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 2021, Vol. 53, No. 2

Reviewed by Marie Thouin:

Can romantic love and individual freedom coexist in intimate relationships? This
question, which has warranted much ink in both academic and popular spheres
(e.g., Haag, 2011; Perel, 2010; Ryan & Jetha´, 2010), is not new—but Jorge Ferrer’s
contribution to the conversation in his new book Love and Freedom: Transcending
Monogamy and Polyamory is genuinely novel.

Building on seminal works that have pointed to the possibility of creating inclusive
intimate relationships beyond the monogamy and polyamory binary (e.g., Barker,
2013; Gahran, 2017; Michaels & Johnson, 2015), Love and Freedom innovates by
drafting a conceptual-experiential map of the territory of transbinary relationships,
suggesting original vocabulary to describe this territory, as well as providing a
detailed discussion on overcoming romantic jealousy to support readers who wish
to explore intimacy beyond existing normativities and orthodoxies.

While delivering tangible solutions toward its practical aim to ‘‘minimize the
suffering of the growing number of individuals who feel excluded from—and thus
oppressed by—the non/monogamy system and attendant mono/poly bipolarity’’ (p.
103), it is also the first book to build some bridges among the scholarly fields of
transpersonal psychology, religious studies, and contemporary relationship
diversity.

Love and Freedom is consistent with Ferrer’s previous philosophical work: it
applies both participatory (see Ferrer, 2002, 2017; Ferrer & Sherman, 2008) and
embodied spirituality (Ferrer, 2008) lenses to the realm of intimate relationships. In
the same way that his past writings on religion sought to replace ideological
hierarchies with an ethical and critical pluralistic approach, Ferrer suggests here
that monogamy and polyamory (along with other forms of CNM) are not
intrinsically good or bad; instead, people can choose those relational styles for
‘‘good’’ or ‘‘bad’’ reasons—‘‘good’’ being relational predispositions, developmental
and sociopolitical conditions, and personal growth, and ‘‘bad’’ being a socially
conditioned, reactionary, or unconscious decision-making process.

In sum, Love and Freedom is a valuable book to diverse audiences—scholars,
therapists, health professionals, and the general public. In a style unique to Ferrer, it
blends a rigorous, well-informed academic voice with a compassionate and
personal tone that makes the text readable to non-academics. The original and
visionary content of this book ensures that it will become foundational to the
development of many new avenues of theory and conversation in the transpersonal
field and beyond."

[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Books]]