
= Compiled in 2015 by Terry Irwin at https://www.academia.edu/13108611/Transition_Design_Bibliography_2015

URL = http://transitiondesign.net/resources/transition-design-bibliography/

=Description=

"The Transition Design Bibliography contains references and links to texts relevant to the emerging ﬁeld of Transition Design and has been organized into categories that correspond to the four areas of the Framework. Many texts are naturally relevant to more than one area. Key topics have been listed in the margin of each section to provide an overview of the territory covered by the texts."
(http://transitiondesign.net/resources/transition-design-bibliography/)

=The Bibliography=

==Vision==

Aberley, Doug. 2008.
“Building a Bioregional, Sustainable Alternative”
. In Judith Plant, Christopher Plant and Van Andruss (eds.)
 Home! A Bioregional Reader 
, pp.159–160. Gabriola Island, BC: New Catalyst Books.Berg, Peter and Raymond Dasmann. 2008.
“Reinhabiting California”
. In Judith Plant, Christopher Plant and Van Andruss (eds.)
 Home! A Bioregional Reader 
, pp. 35–38. Gabriola Island, BC: New Catalyst Books.Bloch, Ernst. 1995.
The Principle of Hope
. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.Borjeson, Lena et al. 2006.
“Scenario Types and Techniques: Towards a User’s Guide”
.
 Futures
, 38: 723–739. Brand, Stewart. 1999.
The Clock of the Long Now: Time and Responsibility
. New York: Basic Books.Candy, Stuart. 2015.
Whose Future is This?
 
TEDxChristchurch
. Available online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YxgVx u2mdZI.Casey, Edward. 2013.
The Fate of Place: A Philosophical History
. Oakland, CA: University of California Press. Charles, Leonard et al. 2008.
“Where You At? A Bioregional Quiz”
. In Judith Plant, Christopher Plant and Van Andruss (eds.)
 Home! A Bioregional Reader 
, p. 29. Gabriola Island, BC: New Catalyst Books.Dunne, Anthony and Fiona Raby. 2013.
Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming
, pp. 1–9. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.Escobar, Arturo. 2013 (unpublished).
“Transiciones: A Space for Research and Design for Transitions to the Pluriverse”
 Forthcoming in
Design Philosophy Papers
, 2015.Fry, Tony. 2009.
Design Futuring: Sustainability, Ethics and New Practice
. Oxford: Berg. Greer, John Michael. 2008.
The Long Descent: A User’s Guide to the End of the Industrial Age.
 Gabriola Island: New Society Publishers.Hopkins, Rob. 2008.
The Transition Town Handbook: From Oil Dependency to Local Resilience
. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing Company.Hopkins, Rob. 2011.
The Transition Companion: Making Your Community More Resilient in Uncertain Times
. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing Company.Knapp, Alex. 2011.
“Brian David Johnson: Intel’s Guide to the Future.”
 
 Forbes Magazine
, October. Available online: http:// www.forbes.com/sites/alexknapp/2011/10/13/brian-david-johnson-intels-guide-to-the-future/.Kossoff, Gideon. 2011.
“Holism and the Reconstitution of Everyday Life: A Framework for Transition to a Sustainable Society.”
 In Stephan Harding (ed)
Grow Small, Think Beautiful: Ideas for a Sustainable World from Schumacher College
. Edinburgh: Floris.Jacoby, Russell. 2005.
Picture Imperfect: Utopian Thought for an Ant-Utopian Age
. New York: Columbia University Press. Manzini, Ezio. 2009.
“A Cosmopolitan Localism: Prospects for a Sustainable Local Development and the Possible Role of Design”
. In Hazel Clark and David Brody (eds),
Design Studies: A Reader 
, p. 448. New York: Berg.Manzini, Ezio. 2012.
“Resilient Systems and Cosmopolitan Localism – The Emerging Scenarios of the Small, Local, Open
 
and Connected Space.”
 
CNS Ecologia Politica
. Available online: http://www.ecologiapolitica.org/wordpress/wp-con tent/uploads/2014/03/Resilient-systems-and-cosmopolitan-localism.pdf.Manzini, Ezio. 2013.
“Small, Local, Open and Connected: Resilient Systems and Sustainable Qualities”
.
Design Observer 
. New York: Design Observer Group. Available online: http://designobserver.com/feature/small-local-open-and-con nected-resilient-systems-and-sustainable-qualities/37670.Manzini, Ezio and François Jégou. 2003.
Sustainable Everyday: Scenarios of Urban Life.
 Milan: Edizioni Ambiente srl.Margolin, Victor. 2007.
“Design, the Future and the Human Spirit”
.
Design Issues
. 23 (3): 4–15. Available online: http://www. mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/desi.2007.23.3.4Orr, David. 2005.
“Place and Pedagogy”
. In Zenobia Barlow and Michael K. Stone (eds)
Ecological Literacy: Educating Our Children for a Sustainable World
, pp. 85-95. San Francisco, CA: Sierra Club Books.Porritt, Jonathon. 2013.
The World We Made: Alex McKay’s Story from 2050
. New York: Phaidon Press Limited.
Raskin, Paul et al. 2002.
The Great Transition: The Promise and Lure of the Times Ahead.
 Stockholm: Stockholm Environmental Institute and Boston: Tellus Institute. Available online: http://www.world-governance.org/article90. html.Rockefeller Foundation and Global Business Network. 2010.
Scenarios for the Future of Technology and International Development
. Available online: http://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/uploads/ﬁles/bba493f7-cc97-4da3-add6-3deb 007cc719.pdf.Sachs, Wolfgang. 1999.
Planet Dialectics: Exploration in Environment and Development
. pp. 105-107. London: Zed Books Ltd.Sale, Kirkpatrick. 1980.
Human Scale
. London: Secker and Warburg. Shuman, Michael. 2000.
Going Local: Creating Self-reliant Communities in a Global Age
. New York: Routledge.Snyder, Gary. 1995.
“Reinhabitation”.
In Alan Drengson and Yuichi Inoue
The Deep Ecology Movement: An Introductory  Anthology 
, pp. 67-73. Berkeley: North Atlantic Books. Speth, James Gustave. 1992.
“The Transition to a Sustainable Society”.
 
Proceedings, National Academy of Science
, USA, 89: 870–872. Available online: http://www.pnas.org/content/89/3/870.full.pdf.Tonkinwise, Cameron. 2014.
Design for Transition - From and to What?
 Available online: https://www.academia. edu/11796491/Design_for_Transition_-_from_and_to_what. Wilkinson, Angela et al. 2013.
“How Plausibility-Based Scenario Practices are Grappling with Complexity to Appreciate and Address 21st Century Challenges”.
 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change
 80: 699-710. Damian, White. 2015.
Future by Design
. Forthcoming July 2015. London: Bristol Classical Press.World Business Council for Sustainable Development. 2010.
“Vision 2050: The New Agenda for Business.”
 Available online: http://www.wbcsd.org/pages/edocument/edocumentdetails.aspx?id=219.Worldwatch Institute. 2013.
State of the World: Is Sustainability Still Possible?
 Washington DC: Island Press

==Theories of Change==

Augros, Robert and George Stanciu . 1987.
The New Biology.
 Boston: Shambhala. Benjamin, Barber. 2013.
If Mayors Ruled the World: Dysfunctional Nations, Rising Cities
. New Haven: Yale University Press. Benkler, Yochai. 2007.
The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom
. New Haven: Yale University Press. Berkhout, Frans, Adrian Smith, and Andy Stirling . 2003.
“Socio-technological Regimes and Transition Contexts.”
 
Science and Technology Policy Research Working Paper Series
. Brighton: University of Sussex. Available online: http://www. sussex.ac.uk/Units/spru/publications/imprint/sewps/sewp106/sewp106.pdf.Berry, Wendell. 2010.
What Matters? Economics for a Renewed Community
, pp. 186-188. San Francisco: Counterpoint. Biehl, Janet and Murray Bookchin,. 1998.
The Politics of Social Ecology
. Montreal: Black Rose. Boff, Leonardo and Hathaway, Mark. 2009.
The Tao of Liberation: Exploring the Ecology of Transformation
. New York: Orbis Books. Bookchin, Murray. 1999.
The Murray Bookchin Reader.
 Janet Biehl (ed). Montreal: Black Rose. Bookchin, Murray. 2005.
The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of Hierarchy
. Edinburgh: AK.Briggs, John and David Peat. 1990.
Turbulent Mirror: An Illustrated Guide to Chaos Theory and the Science of Wholeness.
New York: Harper and Row.Briggs, John and David Peat. 1999.
Seven Life Lessons of Chaos.
New York: Harper Perennial.Brown, Richard Harvey. 1989.
A Poetic for Sociology
. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Callenbach, Ernest. 2008.
Ecology: A Pocket Guide
. Berkeley: University of California. Capra, Fritjof. 1997.
The Web of Life: A New Scientiﬁc Understanding of Living Systems
. New York: Anchor Books.Capra, Fritjof. 2005. “
Speaking Nature’s Language: Principles for Sustainability”
. In Michael K. Stone and Zenobia Barlow (eds)
Ecological Literacy: Educating Our Children for a Sustainable World
, pp. 19-29. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books. Capra, Fritjof and Pier Luigi Luisi,. 2014.
The Systems View of Life: A Unifying Vision
. Padstow, Cornwall: Cambridge University Press.Carson, Kevin A. 2010.
The Homebrew Industrial Revolution: A Low Overhead Manifesto
. Booksurge. de Sousa Santos, Bonaventura. 2006.
The Sociology of Emergences, The Rise of the Global Left: The World Social Forum and Beyond
. London: Zed Books.Delanty, Gerard. 2003.
Community
, pp. 1–21. London: Routledge.Doordan, Dennis P. 2013.
“Developing Theories for Sustainable Design”
. In Stuart Walker and Jaques Giard (eds),
The Hand- book of Design for Sustainability 
. London: Bloomsbury.Douthwaite, Richard. 1996.
Short Circuit: Strengthening Local Economies for Security in an Unstable World
. Totnes: Green Books.Ecologist Magazine. 1993.
Whose Common Future? Reclaiming the Commons
. Gabriola Island: New Society
Eguren, Inigo Retolaza. 2011.
Theory of Change: A Thinking and Action Approach to Navigate in the Complexity of Social Change Processes
. pp. 1-33. Panama City: UNDP and The Hague: Hivos.Ehrenfeld, John R. 2009.
Sustainability by Design: A Subversive Strategy for Transforming Our Consumer Culture
. New Haven: Yale University Press. Elden, Stuart et al. 2003.
Henri Lefebvre, Key Writings
, Continuum, New York. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. 2013.
Toward the Circular Economy: Opportunities for the Consumer Goods Sector
. Cowes: Ellen MacArthur Foundation. Available online: http://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/business/reports/ce2013.Elzen, Boelie, Frank W. Geels and Kenneth Green, eds. 2005.
System Innovation and the Transition to Sustainability.
 Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishers.Escobar, Arturo. 2009.
“Other Worlds are (Already) Possible: Self-Organization, Complexity and Post Capitalist Cultures”
. In Jai Sen and Peter Waterman (eds)
World Social Forum, Challenging Empires
. Available online: http://www.choike. org/documentos/wsf_s506_escobar.pdf.Escobar, Arturo. 2011.
Encountering Development:The Making and Unmaking of the Third World
. Princeton: Princeton University Press.Flemming, David. 2011.
Lean Logic: A Dictionary for the Future and How to Survive It
. England: Calverts. Fry, Tony. 2012.
Becoming Human by Design
. Oxford: Berg. Fry, Tony, Clive Dilnot,and Susan Stewart. 2015.
Design and the Question of History
. London: Bloomsbury. Funtowicz, S. and J. Ravetz 2003.
“Post Normal Science.”
 
 International Society for Ecological Economics, Internet Encyclopae- dia
. Available online: http://isecoeco.org/pdf/pstnormsc.pdf.Gardiner, Michael E. 2000.
Critiques of Everyday Life
. London: Routledge.Geels, Frank W. 2010.
“Ontologies, socio-technical transitions (to sustainability), and the multi-level perspective.”
 
Research Policy 
, 39: 495–510. Available online: http://www.transitionsnetwork.org/ﬁles/Geels,%202010,%20RP,%20 ontologies.pdf.Goodwin, Brian. 1998.
“The Edge of Chaos.”
 In The Spirit of Science: From Experiment to Experience
. Edinburgh: Floris.Grin, John, Jan Rotmans and Johan Schot. 2010.
Transitions to Sustainable Development: New Directions in the Study of Long Term Transformative Change
. London. Routledge.Hargreaves, Tom et al. 2012.
Understanding Sustainability Innovations: Points of Intersection Between the Multi-Level Perspective and Social Practice Theory.
 Norwich: UEA Science, Society and Sustainability (3S) Research Group. Avail- able online: https://uea3s.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2014/12/3s-wp-2012-03-hargreaves-et-al.Harman, Willis. 1999.
“The Issue Before Us”
. In David Lorimer et al (eds)
Wider Horizons: Explorations in Science and  Human Experience
, pp. 246-257. Collingsburgh: Scientiﬁc and Medical Network. Hawken, Paul, Amory Lovins and Hunter L. Lovins. 1999.
Natural Capitalism: Creating the Next Industrial Revolution
. New York: Hachette Book Group.Highmore, Ben. 2002.
The Everyday Life Reader.
 Routledge, London. Ho, Mae-Wan. 1998.
The Rainbow and the Worm: The Physics of Organisms
. New Jersey: World Scientiﬁc.Ho, Mae-Wan. 1999.
“The Physics of Organisms.”
In David Lorimer et al (eds)
Wider Horizons: Explorations in Science and  Human Experience
, pp. 246-257. Collingsburgh: Scientiﬁc and Medical Network. Illich, Ivan. 1987. T
oward a History of Needs
. Berkeley, CA: Heyday Books.Jones, Alwyn. 1997. “
A Gaian Social Critique”
. In Peter Bunyard,
Gaia in Action: Science of the Living Earth
, pp. 266-285. Floris: Edinburgh.Jones, Van. 2008.
The Green Collar Economy
. New York: Harper One. Jullien, Francois. 2011.
The Silent Transformation
. London: Seagull. Kamenetsky, Mario. 1992.
“Human Needs and Aspirations”
in Paul Ekins and Manfred Max-Neef (eds)
Real-Life Economics: Understanding Wealth Creation
. London: Routledge.Kasser, Tim. 2011.
“Ecological Challenges, Materialistic Value and Social Change.”
 In Robert Biswas-Diener (ed)
Positive Psychology as Social Change
. New York: Springer.Koestler, Arthur. 1975.
The Ghost in the Machine
, Pan Books, London. Korten, David C. 1999.
The Post Corporate World: Life after Capitalism
. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.Korten, David. 2010.
Agenda for a New Economy: From Phantom Wealth to Real Wealth
. San Francisco: Berrett Koehler. Kossoff, Gideon. 2011.
Holism and the Reconstitution of Everyday Life: A Framework for Transition to a Sustainable Society.
 Ph.D. diss., University of Dundee, Scotland.Laszlo, Ervin. 1996.
The Systems View of the World: A Holistic Vision for Our Time.
 Cresskill: Hampton Press. Lefebvre, Henri. 1984.
Everyday Life in the Modern World
. Trans. S. Rabinovitch. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.Lefebvre, Henri. 1991.
Critique of Everyday Life
. Trans. John Moore, (1) 228–52. London: Verso.Mander, Jerry. 2012.
The Capitalism Papers: Fatal Flaws of an Obsolete System
. Berkeley: Counterpoint.
Max-Neef, Manfred A. 1992.
Human Scale Development: Conception, Application and Further Reﬂections
. New York: Apex. Available online: http://www.area-net.org/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/papers/Max-neef_Human_Scale_develop ment.pdf.Max-Neef, Manfred and Phillip B. Smith. 2011.
Economics Unmasked: From Power and Greed to Compassion and the Com- mon Good
. Cambridge: UIT Cambridge.Meadows, Donella. 2008.
Thinking in Systems: A Primer
. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing Company.Meadows, Donella. 2009.
Leverage Points: Places to Intervene in a System.”
Solutions Journal
. Available online: http:// www.thesolutionsjournal.com/node/419.Mumford, Lewis.1968.
The City in History: Its Origins, Its Transformations, and its Prospects,
 Boston: Mariner Books. Phillips, D.C. 1976.
Holistic Thought in Social Science
. Stanford: Stanford University Press. Porteous, J. Douglas and Sandra E. Smith. 2001.
Domicide: The Global Destruction of Home
. Montreal: Mc-Gill-Queens. Power, Kate and Oksana Mont. 2010.
“Dispelling the Myths About Consumption Behaviour”
.
 Knowledge, Collaboration and Learning for Sustainable Innovation ERSCP-EMSU Conference
. Delft. Available online: http://cri.dk/sites/cri.dk/ ﬁles/dokumenter/artikler/dispellingthemyths.pdf.Prigogine, Ilya and Isabelle Stengers. 1994.
Order out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue with Nature
. New York: Random House.Ravetz, Jerome R. 2007.
“Post-Normal Science and the Complexity of Transitions Towards Sustainability.”
 
Ecological Com-  plexity 
 3: 275-284. Available online: http://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Jerome_Ravetz/publication/222360540_ Post-Normal_Science_and_the_complexity_of_transitions_towards_sustainability/links/0912f50b499dee ad57000000.pdf.Ricoveri, Giovanna. 2013.
Nature for Sale: The Commons Versus Commodities
. London: Pluto Press.Rifkin, Jeremy. 2011.
The Third Industrial Revolution: How Lateral Power is Transforming Energy, the Economy, and the World
. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. Schumacher, E.F. 1973.
Small Is Beautiful: Economics as if People Mattered
. London: Harper & Row Publishers, Inc.Scott, James C. 1999.
Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed
. New Haven: Yale University Press.Scott, James C. 2014.
 Two Cheers for Anarchism: Six Easy Pieces on Autonomy, Dignity, and Meaningful Work and Play
. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Shirky, Clay. 2008.
Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations
. New York: Penguin.Shove, Elizabeth et al. 2007.
The Design of Everyday Life
. London: Berg. Shove, Elizabeth and G. Walker. 2007.
“Caution! Transitions ahead: politics, practice and sustainable transition manage- ment”
.
Environment and Planning
 39 (4): 763–770. Shove, Elizabeth et al. 2009.
Time, Consumption and Everyday Life: Practice, Materiality and Culture
. London: Bloomsbury. Shove, Elizabeth. 2010.
“Beyond the ABC: Climate Change Policy and Theories of Social Change.”
 
Environment and Plan- ning
, 42 (6): 1273-1285. Available online: http://www.envplan.com/abstract.cgi?id=a42282.Snowden, Dave. 2003.
“Complex Acts of Knowing: Paradox and Descriptive Self-Awareness.”
 
Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 
. Available online: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/store/10.1002/ bult.284/asset/284_ftp.pdf?v=1&t=iawx05ho&s=6189debe1fc5ffd6db54fb68e45ded6aa461d0ed.Snowden, Dave. 2005.
“Strategy in the Context of Uncertainty”
.
 Handbook of Business Strategy 6
 (1): 47-54.Stark, Werner. 1962.
The Fundamental Forms of Social Thought
. London. Routledge and Kegan Paul. Strengers, Yolande. 2010.
Conceptualizing Everyday Practices: Composition, Reproduction and Change
. Melbourne: Centre for Design, RMIT University and University of South Australia. Available online: http://mams.rmit.edu. au/6p1hikrdei2rz.pdf.Sustainable Human. 2104.
How Wolves Change Rivers
, video available online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ysa5O BhXz-Q.Tapscott, Don and Anthony D. Williams. 2010.
Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything
. London: Atlantic Books. Thorgersen, John and Tom Crompton. 2009.
“Simple and Painless? The Limitations of Spillover in Environmental Cam- paigning.”
World Wildlife Foundation
 UK. London: WWF. Available online: http://assets.wwf.org.uk/downloads/ simple_painless_report.pdf.Walker, Brian and David Salt. 2006.
Resilience Thinking: Sustaining Ecosystems and People in a Changing World
. Wash- ington D.C: Island Press.Ward, Colin. 1982.
Anarchy in Action.
 pp. 31-39. London: Freedom Press.Wheatley, Margaret. 2006.
Leadership and The New Science: Discovering Order in a Chaotic World
. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc. White, Damian et al. 2015.
Environments, Natures and Social Theory.
 London: Palgrave.


==Mindset and Posture==

Abram, David. 1996.
“The Mechanical and the Organic.”
 In Peter Bunyard (ed)
Gaia in Action: Science of the Living Earth
, pp. 234-242. Floris: Edinburgh.Abram, David. 2012.
The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human World
. New York: Vintage. Abram, David. 2010.
Becoming Animal: An Earthly Cosmology
. New York: Random House.Alexander, Christopher. 1974.
 Notes on the Synthesis of Form
. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.Amrine, Frederick, Francis Zucker and Harvey Wheeler. 1987.
 Goethe and the Sciences: A Reappraisal
. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company.Anderson, M. Kat. 2005.
Tending the Wild: Native American Knowledge and the Management of California’s Natural Resources
. Berkeley: University of California Press. Bateson, Gregory. 1979.
 Mind and Nature
. London: Wildwood House.Bannon, Bryan E. 2014.
 From Mastery to Mystery: A Phenomenological Foundation for an Environmental Ethic.
 Athens, OH: Ohio University Press. Benkler, Yochai. 2011.
 The Penguin and the Leviathan: How Cooperation Triumphs Over Self-Interest
. New York: Crown. Berman, Morris. 1981.
The Reenchantment of the World
. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Berry, Thomas. 2011.
 The Great Work: Our Way into the Future.
 New York: Crown. Bohm, David. 1996.
 On Dialogue
. London: Routledge.Bortoft, Henri. 1996.
 The Wholeness of Nature: Goethe’s Way Toward a Science of Conscious Participation in Nature.
 Aurora, CO: Lindisfarne Books.Bortoft, Henri. 1999.
 “Goethe’s Organic Vision”
 in David Lorimer et al (eds)
Wider Horizons: Explorations in Science and  Human Experience
. Leven: Scientiﬁc and Medical Network. Bortoft, Henri. 2012.
 Taking Appearance Seriously: The Dynamic Way of Seeing in Goethe and European Thought.
 Edinburgh: Floris Books.Capra, Fritjof. 1983.
 The Turning Point: Science, Society and the Rising Culture
. pp. 362-366, New York: Bantam Books.
 
Clarke, Mary E. 2002.
 In Search of Human Nature.
 London: Routledge.de Quincey, Christian. 2002.
 Radical Nature: Rediscovering the Soul of Nature
. Montpelier: Invisible Cities Press. Drengson, Alan. 1995.
 “Shifting Paradigms: From Technocrat to Planetary Person.”
 In Alan Drengson and Yuichi Inoue (eds)
The Deep Ecology Movement: An Introductory Anthology 
. Berkeley: North Atlantic Books. du Plessis, Hannah. 2014.
 “The Importance of Personal Transformation in Design Education.”
 Presented at the
Cumulus  Johannesburg Conference
, September 22–14 [du Plessis].Ehrenfeld, John R. 2013.
 “The Roots of Unsustainability.”
 In Stuart Walker and Jaques Giard (eds)
The Handbook of Design  for Sustainability 
, pp. 15-26. London: Bloomsbury. Evernden, Neil. 1992.
 The Social Creation of Nature.
 Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press. Fleming, David. 2013.
 Design Education for a Sustainable Future.
 London: Routledge. Freire, Paulo. 2013.
 Education for Critical Consciousness.
 London: Bloomsbury. Goerner, S. .J. 1999.
 After the Clockwork Universe: The Emerging Science and Culture of Integral Society
, pp. 13-25. Floris: Edinburgh.Greenleaf, Robert K. 1991.
 Servant Leadership: A Journey into the Nature and Power of Greatness
. New York: Paulist Press. Grifﬁths, Jay. 2006.
 Wild: An Elemental Journe
y. London: Tarcher. Grudin, Robert. 1982.
 Time and the Art of Living
, New York: Houghton Mifﬂin Company. Harding, Stephan. 2009.
 Animate Earth: Science, Intuition and Gaia.
 Totnes: Green Books.Hayward, Jeremy W. 1997.
 Letters to Vanessa: On Love, Science and Awareness in an Enchanted World.
 Boston: Shambala. Hillman, James. 1992.
 The Thought of the Heart and the Soul of the World
. Dallas: Spring Publications. Hoffman, Nigel. 2007.
 Goethe’s Science of Living Form: The Artistic Stages
. Hillsdale: Adonis Books. Holdrege, Craig. 1998.
 “Seeing the Animal Whole.”
 In David Seamon and Arthur Zajonc (ed)
Goethe’s Way of Science:  A Phenomenology of Nature,
 pp. 1-6. Albany: SUNY. Holdrege, Craig. 2005.
 “Doing Goethean Science.
”
 Janus Head
, 8: 1. Available online: http://www.janushead.org/8-1/ holdrege.pdf.Ingold, Tim. 2011.
 Being Alive: Essays on Movement, Knowledge and Description.
 Abingdon: Routledge. Ingold, Tim. 2011.
 The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill
. Abingdon: Routledge. Ingold, Tim. 2013.
 Making: Anthropology, Archaeology, Art and Architecture.
 Abingdon: Routledge. Irwin, Terry and Baxter, Seaton. 2008.
 “The Dynamical View of Natural Form
.” In C.A Brebbia (ed)
Design and Nature IV 
, pp. 129-138. Southampton: Wessex Institute of Technology.
Isaacs, William. 1999.
 Dialogue: The Art of Thinking Together.
 New York: Doubleday. Jenkins, Jon and Maureen R. Jenkins. 2006.
The 9 Disciplines of a Facilitator: Leading Groups by Transforming Yourself 
. San-Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Kawagley, Angauyuqaq Oscar. 2006.
 Yupiaq Worldview
. Long Grove: Waveland Press. Kearney, Michael. 1984.
 Worldview.
 Novato: Chandler and Sharp, Novato.Kuhn, Thomas S. 2012.
The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions
, pp. 111–135. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Lane, John. 2003.
 Timeless Beauty in the Arts and Everyday Life.
 Cambridge: UIT Cambridge.Leopold, Aldo. 1970.
 A Sand County Almanac
. New York: Ballentine Books. Levin, David Michael. 1999.
 The Philosopher’s Gaze: Modernity in the Shadow of Enlightenment
. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press. Linderman, Albert. 2012.
 Why the World Around You Isn’t as it Appears,
 pp. 1-61. Aurora, CO: Lindisfarne.Madson, Patricia Ryan. 2005.
Improv Wisdom: Don’t Prepare, Just Show Up
. New York: Bell Tower.Marshall, Peter. 1992.
 Nature’s Web: Rethinking Our Place on Earth
. London: Simon and Schuster,. Mathews, Freya. 2001.
 “Deep Ecology.”
 In Dale Jamieson (ed)
 A Companion to Environmental Philosophy 
, pp. 218-234. Oxford: Blackwell.Mathews, Freya. 2013.
 “Post-Materialism.”
In Stuart Walker and Jaques Giard (eds)
The Handbook of Design for Sustain- ability 
, pp. 27-42. London: Bloomsbury. Maturana, Humberto and Francisco Varela. 1992.
 The Tree of Knowledge: The Biological Roots of Human Understanding
. Boston: Shambala Publications, Inc.McGilchrist, Iain. 2011.
“Recapturing the Whole: Brain Hemispheres and the Renewal of Culture”
. In David Lorimer (ed.),
 A New Renaissance: Transforming Science, Spirit and Society 
, pp. 67-71. Edinburgh: Floris.McGilchrist, Iain. 2012.
 The Master and his Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World
. New Haven: Yale University Press. Merchant, Carolyn. 1983.
 The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology and the Scientiﬁc Revolution.
 San Francisco, Harper and Row. Morin, Edgar and Kern, Anne Brigitte. 1999.
 Homeland Earth: A Manifest for the New Millennium
, pp. 123-132. New York: Hampton Press. Mumford, Lewis. 1974.
 The Pentagon of Power: The Myth of the Machine
 vol. 2. San Diego: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich. Norberg-Hodge, Helena. 2000.
 Ancient Futures: Learning from Ladakh.
 London: Rider. Orr, David W. 1994.
 Earth in Mind: On Education, Environment and the Human Prospect.
 Washington DC: Island Press. Polyani, Michael. 1962.
 Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy
. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Polyani, Michael. 2009.
 The Tacit Dimension.
 Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Quinn, Daniel. 2002.
 Beyond Civilization
. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Rettig, Marc, and Hannah du Plessis. 2013.
 “Fundamentals of Design for Social Innovation.”
 From coursework on the MFA in Design for Social Innovation, School of Visual Arts, New York. Available online: http://dsi.sva.edu/news-and-events/ fundamentals-of-design-for-social-innovation.Ritzer, George. 2011.
 The McDonaldization of Society 6.
 Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.Rothenberg, David. 1995.
 
“A Platform of Deep Ecology”.
 In Alan Drengson and Yuichi Inoue
The Deep Ecology Movement:  An Introductory Anthology 
, pp. 157-165. Berkeley: North Atlantic Books. Roszak, Theodore. 1995.
 Ecopsychology: Restoring the Earth, Healing the Mind.
 San Francisco: Sierra Club Books. Schad, Wolfgang. 1997.
 Man and Mammals: Toward a Biology of For
m. New York: Waldorf.Seamon, David. 1998.
 Goethe’s Way of Science: A Phenomenology of Nature.
 New York: State University of New York Press.Sennett, Richard. 2009.
 The Craftsman
. New Haven: Yale University Press. Shiva, Vandana. 1993.
 Monocultures of the Mind: Perspectives on Biotechnology and Biodiversity,
 pp. 9-12. London: Zed Books. Shiva, Vandana. 1999.
 Biopiracy: The Plunder of Nature and Knowledge
. pp. 101-106. Gabriola Island: South End Press. Somerville, Margaret A. and David J. Rapport. 2000.
 Transdisciplinarity: Recreating Integrated Knowledge
. Oxford: EOLSS. Spinosa, Charles, Fernando Flores and Hubert Dreyfus. 1997.
 Disclosing New World: Entrepreneurship, Democratic Action and the Cultivation of Solidarity.
 Cambridge: MIT Press. Spretnak, Charlene. 2011.
 Relational Reality: New Discoveries of Interrelatedness that are Transforming the Modern World.
 Topsham: Green Horizon Books. Tarnas, Richard. 2010.
 “The Greater Copernican Revolution and the Crisis of the Modern World View.”
In David Lorimer and Oliver Robinson (eds)
 A New Renaissance: Transforming Science, Spirt and Society 
, pp. 48-60. Edinburgh: Floris. Thompson, D’Arcy. 1961.
 On Growth and Form. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 
Toulmin, Stephen. 1990.
 Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity
. New York: Free Press. Tuan, Yi-Fu. 1974.
 Topophilia
, pp. 79-91. New York: Columbia University Press. Turnbull, Colin M. 1983.
 The Mbuti Pygmies: Change and Adaptation
. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Wadddington, C.H. 1968.
“The Character of Biological Form.”
In Lancelot Law Whyte (ed)
 Aspects of Form
, pp. 43-56. London: Lund Humphries. Watkins, Mary and Helen Shulman. 2010.
Toward Psychologies of Liberation
. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. Wheatley, Margaret, and Myron Kellner-Rogers. 1996.
A Simpler Way
. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.Whitt, Anne-Laurie. 2001.
“Indigenous Perspectives.”
 In Dale Jamieson (ed)
 A Companion to Environmental Philosophy 
. Oxford: Blackwell. Williams, Christopher. 1974.
Craftsmen of Necessity.
 New York: Random House.Williams, Christopher. 1995.
Origins of Form: The Shape of Natural and Man Made Things — why they came to be the way they are and how they change
. Stamford: Architectural Book Publishing Co. Wymer, Norman. 1946.
English Country Crafts
, London: Western Printing Services.Yanagi, Soetsu. 1989.
The Unknown Craftsman: A Japanese Insight into Beauty.
 Tokyo: Kodansha Wymer, Norman. 1951.


==New Ways of Designing==

Amatullo, Mariana. 2014.
“Codifying Practices in an Emergent Space: Insights from the LEAP Symposium on the New Professional Frontier in Design for Social Innovation.”
 
Design Principles and Practices Journal Annual Review 
, 7: 55–67. Available online: http://ijgar.cgpublisher.com/product/pub.282/prod.18.Benyus, Janine. 1997.
Biomimicry.
 New York: William Morrow. Berry, Wendell. 2005.
“Solving for Pattern.”
 In Michael K. Stone and Zenobia Barlow (eds)
Ecological Literacy: Educating our Children for a Sustainable World
. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books. Brown, Azby. 2013.
Just Enough: Lessons in Living Green From Traditional Japan
. North Clarendon, VT: Tuttle. Buchanan, Richard. 1995.
“Wicked Problems in Design Thinking.”
In Victor Margolin and Richard Buchanan (eds)
The Idea of Design: A Design Issues Reader 
. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Crowe, Norman. 1999.
Nature and the Idea of a Man-Made World
. Cambridge: MIT Press. Day, Christopher. 2002.
Spirit and Place
. Oxford: Architectural Press. Day, Christopher. 2003.
Consensus Design: Socially Inclusive Process
. Oxford: Architectural Press. Drenttel, William and Michael Mossoba. 2013.
“Winterhouse Fourth Symposium on Design Education and Social Change: Final Report.”
 
Change Observer 
, November 8. Available online: http://www.networkedblogs.com/QTA7Z.Forlizzi, Jodi and John Zimmerman. 2013.
“Promoting Service Design as a Core Practice in Interaction Design.”
 Paper presented at the
 IASDR Conference
, Tokyo, Japan, August 26–30. Available online: http://design-cu.jp/iasdr2013/pa pers/1202-1b.pdf.Fry, Tony. 2011.
Design as Politics.
 Oxford: Berg. Fuad-Luke, Alastair. 2007.
“Re-deﬁning the Purpose of (Sustainable) Design: Enter the Design Enablers, Catalysts in Co-design”
. In Jonathan Chapman and Nick Gant (eds)
Designers, Visionaries, and Other Stories: A Collection of Sus tainable Design Essays
. London: Earthscan. Hester, Randolph T. 2010.
Design for Ecological Democracy
. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Hodder, Ian. 2012.
Entangled: An Archeology of the Relationships Between Humans and Things.
 Chichester: Wiley- Blackwell. Holmgren, David. 2011.
Permaculture: Principles and Pathways beyond Sustainability
. East Moen: Permanent Publications.Irwin Terry et al. 2005.
Design and Sustainability: A Scoping Report for the Sustainable Design Forum
. London: Depart ment for Environment, Food and Human Affairs. Available online: https://www.academia.edu/4655832/Design_and_ Sustainability_A_Scoping_Report_UK_Design_Council_DTI_2005. Irwin, Terry. 2011.
“Design for a Sustainable Future,”
 2: 41–60. In Hershauer, Basile, and McNall (eds),
The Business of Sus- tainability 
. Santa Barbara: Praeger.Irwin, Terry. 2011a.
“Wicked Problems and the Relationship Triad.”
 In Stephan Harding (ed.),
Grow Small, Think Beautiful:  Ideas for a Sustainable World from Schumacher College
. Edinburgh: Floris Books.Irwin, Terry. 2011b.
Living Systems Theory and Its Relevance to Design: A Matrix. Developed for the 2011 AIGA Conference
, Phoenix. https://www.academia.edu/6076107/Living_Systems_Theory_Relevance_to_Design.Irwin, Terry. 2015.
“Transition Design: A Proposal for a New Area of Design, Practice, Study and Research.”
 
Design and Culture Journal
, forthcoming July 2015. Irwin, Terry, Cameron Tonkinwise and Gideon Kossoff. 2013.
“Transition Design: Re-conceptualizing Whole Lifestyles.”
 
 Head, Heart, Hand: AIGA Design Conference
, October 12, Minneapolis. Available online: http://www.aiga.org/video- HHH-2013-irwin-kossoff-tonkinwise
Kimbell, Lucy. 2014.
The Service Innovation Handbook: Action-Oriented Creative Thinking Toolkit for Service Organiza- tions
. Amsterdam: BIS Publishers. Kolko, John. 2012.
Wicked Problems: Problems Worth Solving
. Austin: Austin Center for Design.
LEAP Symposium
. 2013. Art Center, Pasadena, September 19–21. Website: http://leapsymposium.org/.Leonard, Annie. 2010. T
he Story of Stuff: The Impact of Overconsumption on the Planet, Our Communities and Our Health – and How We Can Make it Better
. New York: Free Press. Lommee, Thomas. 2012.
Open Structures: Thomas Lommee at TEDxEutropolis
. Available online: https://www.youtube. com/watch?v=5FXTlOytJRI. Manzini, Ezio. 2007.
“Design Research for Sustainable Social Innovation.”
 
Design Research Now 
. Basel: Birkhaüser. Avail- able online: https://blog.itu.dk/DISD-E2013/ﬁles/2013/08/sustainablesocialinnovation_manzini.pdf.Manzini, Ezio and Vezzoli, Carlo. 2010.
Design for Environmental Sustainability
. London: Springer.Manzini, Ezio. 2015.
Design When Everybody Designs: An Introduction to Design for Social Innovation
. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Martin, Bella and Hanington, Bruce. 2012.
Universal Methods of Design
. Beverly, MA: Rockport.Margolin, Victor. 2002.
The Politics of the Artiﬁcial: Essays on Design and Design Studies
. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Maxwell, Joseph A. 2012.
Qualitative Research Design: An Interactive Approach
, pp. 39-53. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.McDonough, Bill and Michael Braungart. 2002.
Cradle to Cradle
. New York: North Point Press.McHarg, Ian. 1998.
To Heal the Earth
. New York: Island Press.Mendoza, Andrea. 2010.
Desis Newsletter 2: Amplify Workshop.
 Available online: http://www.desis-network.org/? q=node/356. Mollison, Bill. 1988.
Permaculture: A Designer’s Manual
. Tyalgum, Australia: Tagari Publications.Orr, David W. 2004.
The Nature of Design: Ecology, Culture, and Human Intention
. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Orr, David W. 2011.
Hope is an Imperative: The Essential David Orr.
 Washington DC: Island Press .Papanek, Victor. 1995.
The Green Imperative: Ecology and Ethics in Design and Architecture
. London: Thames and Hudson. Penin, Lara. 2013.
“Designing in the Wild: Amplifying Creative Communities in North Brooklyn.”
 
Cumulus Working Papers,
 Helsinki-Espoo, December 2012. Publication Series G. Helsinki: Aalto University, School of Arts, Design and Architecture. Available online: http://www.cumulusassociation.org/images/stories/Working_papers/WP_Helsin- ki_2012.pdf.Pettersen, Ida Nilstad, Casper Boks and Arnold Tukker. 2013.
“Framing the Role of Design in Transformation of Consump- tion Practices: Beyond the Designer-Product-User Triad.”
 
 International Journal of Technology Management 
, 63(1–2): 70–103.Polkinghorne, Donald. 1983.
Methodology for the Human Sciences: Systems of Inquiry
. Albany, State University of New York Press. Saco, Roberto M. and Alexis Goncalves. 2008.
“Service Design: An Appraisal.”
 
Design Management Review 
, 19(1): 10–19.Scott, Kakee et al. 2011.
“Designing Change by Living Change.”
 
Design Studies
 33 (3): 279-297. Service Design Network. 2014.
What is Service Design?.
 Available online: http://www.service-design-network.org/.Shedroff, Nathan. 2009.
Design is the Problem: The Future of Design Must be Sustainable
. New York: Rosenfeld Media. Sherwin, Chris. 2012.
“Bringing Social Innovation to Life through Design.”
 
The Guardian Sustainable Business
, December 17. Available online: http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/blog/design-for-social-innovation.Smithsonian’s Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum, the National Endowment for the Arts, and The Lemelson Founda tion. 2013. A white paper based on the
“Social Impact Design Summit,”
 February 27. Available online: http://arts.gov/ sites/default/ﬁles/Design-and-Social-Impact.pdf.Thackera, John. 2005.
In the Bubble: Design in a Complex World.
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Todd, Nancy Jack and John Todd. 1994.
From Eco-Cities to Living Machines: Principles of Ecological Design
. Berkeley: California: North Atlantic Books. Tonkinwise, Cameron. 2014.
Design’s (Dis)Orders: Transition Design as Postindustrial Design.
 Available online: https:// www.academia.edu/11791137.Tonkinwise, Cameron. 2014.
Transition Design
, Konstfack Lecture, 2014. Available online: https://vimeo.com/113233445.Walker, Stuart. 2006.
Sustainable by Design: Explorations in Theory and Practice
. London: Earthscan. Walker, Stuart. 2014.
Designing Sustainability: Making Radical Changes in a Material World.
 Abingdon: Routledge. Wasserman, Arnold and Peter Scupelli. 2015.
DEXIGN FUTURES: Lessons learned teaching design futures.
 Seattle. IDSA International Conference: Future of the Future. (In press).Winterhouse Institute. 2013.
Social Design Pathways Matrix.
 Winterhouse Symposium on Design Education and Social Change. Available online: http://www.socialdesignpathways.com/download-the-matrix/

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P Transition]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Reference]]