
= also called translocal social movements

=Description=

Flor Avelino:

"These networks share two important characteristics. First, they breed social innovation by changing social relations through new ways of doing, thinking and organizing. As such they are not just protesting against existing systems, but also creating and implementing alternatives. Second, they are locally rooted, while also being globally connected through translocal networks. These translocal networks can integrate the best of both the global and the local, connecting communities internationally and promoting global solidarity while also acknowledging and appreciating deep local identities and traditions. This combination of an innovative spirit and translocal connections is important to empower people to take collective action."
(http://www.thebrokeronline.eu/Blogs/Inclusive-Economy-Europe/Time-to-ignite-the-power-of-translocal-social-movements)


=Examples=

"There is, for instance, the Global Ecovillage Network (connecting hundreds of ecovillages across the world), Transition Towns (grassroots communities working on local resilience) and the International Co-operative Association. In the field of food and agro-ecology, there is the Seed Exchange Network (defending biodiversity and seed freedom), the Slow Food movement and La Via Campesina (a farmers’ movement to promote social justice). Focusing specifically on finance and economics, there is the European Federation of Ethical and Alternative Banks (FEBEA), Time Banks (reciprocal service exchange), the Intercontinental Network for the Promotion of the Social Solidarity Economy (RIPESS), Shareable and the Basic Income Earth Network. There are many more examples, such as the International Observatory for Participatory Democracy, the Impact Hub (social impact entrepreneurs), FABLABS (digital fabrication workshops), the DESIS-network (design for social innovation and sustainability), and the international Living Knowledge Network of science shops."
(http://www.thebrokeronline.eu/Blogs/Inclusive-Economy-Europe/Time-to-ignite-the-power-of-translocal-social-movements)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]