
'''* Article: Transport Layer Identification of P2P Super nodes. By DJ Oneil Hun Jeong Kang Jinoh Kim Donghyong Kwon'''

URL =


=Abstract=

"Since P2P applications emerged, the amount of P2P traffic has continually
grown. This poses potential costs as it entails extra workload on the network and
host machines. First-generation P2P protocols used well-defined port numbers,
allowing network administrators to control user access to these networks. Some
of the earliest P2P networks, such as Napster, relied on central servers to connect
peers and took on the processing and traffic costs of doing so. Many current
P2P protocols allow users to define their listening port number and use random
ports to connect to other peers. Consequently, the only reliable way to identify
P2P traffic is by using user payload. However, there are legal and technical
issues associated with this. Also, emerging P2P technologies are beginning to
encrypt the payload, rendering payload validation impossible. These new P2P
networks use super nodes to connect groups of peers. Super nodes are similar to
the central servers of earlier networks, but are responsible for a small subset of
peers. Any node on a P2P network can be promoted to a super node and will
consequently be responsible for networking connected peers and forwarding on
their searches. This can add a significant computational burden and increase in
incoming and outgoing network traffic to the super node. This is often done
without the user's knowledge and explicit permission. Our goal is to identify
hosts running P2P applications and classify each P2P node as being a super node
or regular peer node."


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]