
=Description=

by Maja Kuzmanovic and Nik Gaffney:

"At FoAM we provide space to explore transitions in our long-form residency programme, macrotransiencies. “Transients” (as opposed to residents) are people undergoing a major transition in their lives, such as an illness, emigration, or change of career. We support them to consciously engage with their transition for anywhere between six months to a year. Similar to a rite of passage, a transiency includes periods of separation, liminality, and incorporation. It begins with acknowledging what conditions have led to the present and creating necessary distance from the past. The most challenging and confusing part is often the liminal period, when transients exist between two states: transition and transformation. This is where spending time in an arts laboratory reaps its benefits. Our experience with experimentation and emergence, which characterises both transitions and creative processes, enables us to offer methods and situations to explore the unknown. Finally, during the stage of incorporation, we help transients to re-enter the world, renewed and more confident with their new abilities and identities."
(https://medium.com/aperiodic-mesmerism/thriving-in-uncertainty-d74b75020b05)


=Example=

by Maja Kuzmanovic and Nik Gaffney:

"Barbara Raes began her transiency at FoAM in 2014 during a period that she described as “the time when the abyss between your own deep beliefs and the survival strategies in your daily practice became too deep”. She conceived her transiency as “a quest for a possible future for myself, for a changing world and for myself in the changing world”. She began by shedding her skin as an artistic director (“Barbara comma title”) to getting to know herself without a job title (“Barbara comma nothing”), then gradually taking on a new identity as she immersed herself in researching parting rituals for unrecognised loss — from rituals for miscarried children to observances for mastectomy patients. We supported Barbara using a range of techniques including transdisciplinary coaching and experiential futures, as well as providing a space to inquire and prototype what her life might be like after the transiency."
(https://medium.com/aperiodic-mesmerism/thriving-in-uncertainty-d74b75020b05)

[[Category:Labor]]