'''Trebor Scholz is an artist and focuses on online cooperation, in particular in the fields of art and creativity.'''

==Bio==

"Trebor Scholz is an artist, writer, conference organizer and chair of the conference series The Politics of Digital Culture at The New School in NYC where he is an Assistant Professor of Media Study. His forthcoming monograph with Polity offers a history of the Social Web and its Orwellian economies. In 2011, he co-authored From Mobile Playgrounds to Sweatshop City (with Laura Y. Liu). Scholz is the editor of two collections of essays, Learning Through Digital Media (iDC, 2011) and a volume on digital labor (Routledge, 2012). He co-edited the Situated Technologies series of 9 books and The Art of Free Cooperation  (Autonomedia, 2007). Recent book chapters include “Facebook as Playground and Factory,” “Points of Control,” and “Cheaper by the Dozen. An Introduction to Crowdsourcing.” Scholz spoke at 150 conferences internationally. He also founded the Institute for Distributed Creativity that is widely known for its online discussions of critical network culture.  Dr. Scholz holds a grant from the John D. & Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.He chaired seven major conferences and chaired the MobilityShifts summit in 2011."

''The following bio from collectivate.net, 2017''

"Trebor Scholz grew up in East Berlin and is currently based in New York where he works both collaboratively and individually as an artist, media theorist, activist, and organizer. His interests focus on media theory, art and education.

In 2004 Scholz founded the Institute for Distributed Creativity, iDC (www.distributedcreativity.org) which is an independent research network that concentrates on (online) collaboration. In 2005 the Institute organized "Share, Share Widely," the first large conference about media art education (www.newmediaeducation.org) at the CUNY Graduate Center. In April 2004, together with Geert Lovink, he organized the conference Free Cooperation on the art of (online) collaboration, held at SUNY Buffalo (www.freecooperation.org). In 2000 he facilitated the only large scale program immediately responding to the Kosovo War-- "Kosov@: Carnival in the Eye of the Storm." (www.intheeyeofthestorm.info/)

Scholz' work has been exhibited at the Venice Biennial (with Martha Rosler/ The Fleas), the Sao Paulo Biennial, FILE (Sao Paolo) and many other venues. He has lectured in the U.S. and internationally at dozens of festivals and conferences including Transmediale (Berlin), ISEA (Helsinki, Tallin), Multimedia Art Asia Pacific Conference (Singapore), Nordic Institute for Contemporary Art (Helsinki, NIFCA), Stanford University, NewMediaNation (Bratislava, Slovakia), Version3 (N5M, Chicago), Tactical Media Lab at New York University, PS1 (Contemporary Art Center New York City), Haute Ecole d'Art (Geneva, Switzerland), University of California Los Angeles, Dartmouth College, Academy of Visual Arts (Leipzig, Germany), San Francisco State University, University of California San Diego, and The School of the Art Institute in Chicago.

Scholz has written on media art, networks, education and participatory cultures for many periodicals such as Art Journal, FibreCulture Journal, Afterimage, and C-Theory. He has contributed essays to several books and co-edited "Free Cooperation: The Art of (Online) Collaboration" forthcoming with Autonomedia. Scholz has taught media art, history, and theory at Pacific NW College of Art (Portland), The University of Arizona (Tucson), and Bauhaus University (Weimar) and is currently professor and researcher in the Department of Media Study at the State University of New York at Buffalo."
(http://collectivate.net/about/)

==More Information==

* [[Trebor Scholz on the Web 2.0 Exploitation of Free Labour]] (podcast, 2007)
* [[Trebor Scholz on Digital Labor]] (webcast, 2013)
* [[Trebor Scholz et al on Cooperative Alternatives to the Sharing Economy]] (video, 2015)
* [[Trebor Scholz on How Platform Cooperativism Can Unleash the Network]] (video, 2016)
* [[Trebor Scholz on the Prospects of the Cooperative Platform Economy]] (video of lecture, c. 2016)
* [[Trebor Scholz on Platform Cooperativism]] (video, 2017) 
* [[Trebor Scholz on Advancing Platform Cooperativism]] (interview, 2019) 
* [[Platform Cooperativism]]
* [[Participatory Challenge]]

* [https://www.newschool.edu/public-engagement/faculty/trebor-scholz/ page at The New School, New York]
* [https://platform.coop/people/trebor-scholz/ page on the Platform Cooperativism Consortium]

[[Category:Labor]]
[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Germany]]
[[Category:USA]]