
=Description=

CASSE:

"Nothing says it more succinctly than the Bible: “All flesh is grass” (Isaiah 40:6). We and all animals are dependent upon plants for our existence and growth. This principle, called “trophic structure” in ecology, has profound implications for economic policy.

All ecosystems have a trophic structure. “Trophic” refers to the flow of energy and nutrition. The most basic trophic categories are producers and consumers. The producers are plants; they literally produce food in the process of photosynthesis. Consumers range from primary to secondary, tertiary, and sometimes even higher.
Primary consumers (for example, rabbits) eat plants. Secondary consumers (for example, foxes) eat mostly primary consumers. Higher-level consumers (for example, wolves) eat a mix of other consumers. High-level omnivores may also eat large quantities of plant material.

...

Along with thermodynamics, trophic principles establish a limit to economic growth. This limit applies in the real sector (that is, in the production and consumption of goods and services) and the monetary sector. In other words, volumes and flows of money (for example, expenditures on gross national product) indicate the level of human impact on the environment. Therefore, expansionary monetary policy leads either to increased environmental impact and erodes long-term economic capacity, or to inflation if the environmental capacity for economic growth has been exceeded."
(http://steadystate.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/12/CASSE_Brief_TrophicStructureOfTheEconomy.pdf)

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Economics]]