
URL = http://truetopiaproject.org/


=Description=

Cies Breijs:

"Truetopia is an open source project developing a generic self-governance web application. The application allows its users collaborate on finding solutions to their shared problems. Using the application shared problems are identified, understood and (in theory) solved. This is accomplished using a direct-democratic system of online publishing, rating and voting.

The application is designed so that it can be modified easily (hackable), as it is foreseen that users of an installation of Truetopia want the application to change (they identify shared problems regarding the application). A default installation of Truetopia should allow its users to easily collaborate on the modifying their application. In fact this is the project goal of Truetopia: to create a web application so that modifications to it can be directed entirely by its users through using the application.

Wikipedia.org is an application that allows its users to collaboratively create an encyclopedia. MediaWiki is an open source web application originally written for Wikipedia. A wiki is a page or collection of web pages designed to enable anyone who accesses it to contribute or modify content. In the case of Wikipedia, the MediaWiki wiki software is used to create an encyclopedia. There are many other sites that use MediaWiki, and MediaWiki is just one of the many brands of wiki out there.

Where MediaWiki focuses on collaborative publishing; Truetopia focuses on collaborative governance, or collaborative decision taking, or even more generic: collaborative problem solving. The uses of Truetopia can be numerous, like MediaWiki, and, like MediaWiki, cannot not be foreseen on forehand."
(http://truetopiaproject.org/)


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Politics]]