* Book: Trust: Self-Interest and The Common Good. Market Kohn. Oxford University Press.







=Interview=

Interview with Marek Kohn by the journal of the [[Radical Anthropology Group]].

URL = http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/new/Journal_files/journal_02.pdf


"Radical Anthropology: In '''your new
book, Trust: Self-Interest and The
Common Good''', you discuss the
biological origins of trust. Is trust
peculiarly human? Or does it have
parallels in the animal world?

Marek Kohn: The primatologist Frans
de Waal observes that, “We have no
trouble recognising the difference
between a trustful or distrustful
dog, and we know how long it can
take to turn the latter into the former.”

If an animal can form expectations
about how another will act with
respect to itself, we can think of it as
being able to trust. But the question
gets more difficult and interesting if
one understands trust as involving a
sense of selves and others: that to trust,
one needs to have a sense that others
are individuals, with interests and
motives of their own. Trusting them is
expecting that they will incorporate
one’s own interests into theirs. So this
is a question about whether nonhuman
animals have what’s known as
‘theory of mind’ – which will doubtless
be the subject of heated debate among
primatologists for years to come!


RA: If trust has parallels in the animal
world, and if human life is so
characterised by trust, why it is a
problem in the first place?

MK: Sure, there’s a lot of trust about,
but the particular problem these days is
that it doesn’t go very deep. A
constantly moving, accelerating world
reduces the opportunities for trust to
grow through experience, familiarity,
habit, and the commitment involved in
relationships – personal, intimate or
occupational – that are intended to last
a long time. This isn’t to say that trust
is a peculiarly modern problem,
though. It’s a problem in the first place
because co-operation is fundamentally
problematic between agents whose
interests are not identical. To
understand how to promote trust and
how to place it well, we need to work
from first principles to see how interests
may be combined into a common good.


RA: And what are those first
principles? Are they Darwinian, would
you say?

MK: They are; though they can be
derived from other kinds of cost-benefit
analysis. Differing genetic interests can
cause problems of trust, particularly in
‘familial’ societies where families trust
each other implicitly and everybody
else very little. This often arises when
the state is oppressive or dysfunctional,
failing to implement laws fairly and
inhibiting the development of civil
society: under such conditions the
family becomes a fortress.


RA: So traditional societies can be too
parochial for widespread trust to
develop; modern societies too chaotic.
But why do you think widespread trust
is desirable anyway? Could we not just
get by, as Thatcher implied, with
individuals and their families?

MK: Another politician, David
Trimble, recently observed (in the
context of his experience in Northern
Ireland) that trust is “over-rated and
frequently misplaced”. He has a point.

Trust is not strictly necessary to
achieve many forms of co-operation,
and to focus on trust, as political
commentators often do, can be to
concentrate on the icing when what
matters is the cake.

However, even in situations where cooperation
can be achieved without
trust, trust may be needed to sustain
the co-operation. Reading accounts of
informal truces on the Western Front
in the First World War, I was struck by
the extent to which trust seemed to
arise between soldiers on opposing
sides, and how such sentiments may
have helped to maintain the truces in
situations where violations would
inevitably occur. In real life, signals are
often noisy – in the trenches literally
so, the signals often actually being
transmitted by gunfire – and so people
need to interpret them according to
their understanding of others’
intentions. No ceasefire would have
lasted if any shot was interpreted as a
deliberate breach. Trust makes cooperation
resilient instead of brittle.

Well-placed trust makes relationships
work better. It allows people to take
advantage of opportunities they would
otherwise miss, and makes the colours
of social interaction more intense.


RA: In your book you say “capitalism
has won the global game of how to
make a living”.Marx and others
pointed out that capitalism is parasitic
on trust.Workers in the factory, in the
home and in society generally operate
on communist principles – if my
colleague asks me to pass the spanner, I
don’t charge him for my time; my mum
doesn’t put a padlock on the fridge. Yet
the profits that accrue from this social
trust go into the pockets of a small
minority of individuals. Isn’t the global
consensus on capitalism more an
example of misplaced trust than of
deserved success?

MK: It depends on where you think
value comes from. By locating the
source of value in labour, Marxism
proposes that capital is inherently
exploitative and implies that workers
are wrong to trust in it. Orthodox
economics, on the other hand,
welcomes capital as a source of value.
In Britain, the old labour movement
was deeply mistrustful of capital and
management, whereas on the
Continent, notably in West Germany,
relations between capital and labour
were structured around an idea of
social partnership which implied trust.
Indeed I believe they still largely are, to
the workers’ benefit."

...

RA: You say that, in modern societies,
the “attenuation of traditional
authority has created a vacuum in
social relations that is being filled
by bureaucratic regulation”.
Where once there were customs in
common, now there are contracts
between individuals. Is this
development largely good or bad?
Is it reversible? What kind of political
strategies and real-world projects give
us grounds for hope that the future
could be more trustful?

MK: You often see signs on buses
along the lines of “Please give up this
seat for someone who is less able to
stand than you”. It’s welcome that
public transport providers are
concerned to redistribute seats from
those with standing ability to those
with a need to sit down, but
regrettable that passengers should
need to be asked. And the further an
organisation goes in its efforts to
bring about fairness by regulation, the
weaker the relations between people
become. When they are required to
obey rules, individuals are relieved of
the responsibility to make their ethical
decisions for themselves, and to think
about how they should engage with
others. French public transport has a
tradition of chapter and verse on this
– priority in descending order to
‘mutilés de guerre’, blind civilians,
industrially disabled people, and so on
– which replaces individual
judgement, and public spirit, with a
bureaucratic code. Doing the right
thing becomes doing what is
prescribed – and if it’s not prescribed,
it probably won’t be done. People’s
relationships are with authority rather
than with each other.

The question is, though, how would
they behave if they weren’t told how
to behave? We should bear in mind
that a lot of behavioural prescriptions
in organisations have been introduced
because people couldn’t be trusted not
to discriminate against women, ethnic
minorities or other groups. Such
prejudice has become much less
socially acceptable, so by and large
people will have become more
trustworthy in these respects. At the
moment, organisations remain
obsessed with achieving standards
through detailed bureaucratic
prescription, so that will probably
continue for the time being. But I can
imagine things changing as the costs
of such strategies become too
tiresome, and as institutions become
more confident that their people could
be trusted to treat others without
prejudice. Trust lowers costs – of lost
opportunities as well as of policing
behaviour – so organisations should
be able to appreciate the value of
rediscovering it."
(http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/new/Journal_files/journal_02.pdf)



[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Books]]