
URL = http://trustmojo.com/

=Description=

"Trustmojo is an ongoing research project exploring trust on the new web.

We, Alexander Ljung and Eric Wahlforss, spent three months in San Francisco in the summer of 2006 visiting cool places and talking to interesting people about trust. We trying to understand just how interpersonal trust works on the web. Our focus are on questions such as “What exactly is mediated trust?”, “What role does interpersonal trust play in the context of Web 2.0 and beyond?”, and “How does new representations of identity affect the way we build and establish trust online?”.

Trust is a basic underlying component of every society and it enables people to interact and build relationships. Without trust, societies simply would not function. As people spend more time online, mediated trust becomes increasingly important. People are building, complementing and fostering their new or pre-existing relationships via the web and interpersonal mediated trust has become a part of everyday life.

We think this is really interesting, and so we’ve decided to study the issue of trust on the new web on location in San Francisco. Trustmojo is our project platform, and we’ll use it to put out, and structure our thoughts – hopefully also to foster discussions and get feedback from people like you. The project itself will result in a joint master’s thesis at Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, and a series of presentations and talks."
(http://trustmojo.com/about/)


=More Information=

See our entries on [[Trust]] and [[Reputation]]


[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Movements]]