
= social network site using a revenue sharing model


=Description=

Gideon Rosenblatt:

"Tsu (pronounced “sue”) is an advertising-based social network that shares its revenues with end users, based on their engagement and recruitment efforts. I’ve heard four main objections to Tsu: that it’s not possible to earn significant money from it, that it will just attract bad actors bent on gaming the system, that money will debase the ethos of today’s social networks, and that its multi-level marketing scheme feels a bit sleazy. I’ll address the first and last points now and save the other two objections for more general treatment at the end, since they are not unique to Tsu.

It is true that Tsu uses a multi-level marketing (MLM) strategy that gives users a cut of the revenues earned by people they recruit into the network. My user name is @gideonro, for example, and if you use that link to sign up, you will split your Tsu revenues with me in perpetuity. When you engage on Tsu in ways that help the social network generate revenues, such as when your posts generate likes, shares, and comments, 10% of those revenues go to Tsu to support the network and 45% goes to you. The remaining 45% is split (in a somewhat confusing formula) with those users above you in your payment hierarchy, which Tsu calls your “family tree.”

The family tree revenue hierarchy was clearly designed to speed user growth of the network. But on this count, I fear Tsu’s management may have badly underestimated the value we attach to our social capital. Tsu uses an MLM strategy which doesn’t make it a true pyramid scheme, but for many people, that distinction is a nuance. Things that smell even vaguely like a pyramid tend to send us scurrying for fear of being scammed ourselves or making our friends think we’re using them for financial gain.

As for the criticism that no one will make real money from this platform, I think the critics are wrong – assuming Tsu eventually does catch on. To show you why, let me share some actual royalty figures from a few friends who are active on the service.

After about a week on the service, friend “A” was generating $3-4 a day. This is just a week after the network’s launch, and with only a small base of people generating advertising views. Is it possible to imagine this friend eventually generating a few hundred dollars a day from Tsu? It’s still too early to say, but it’s not out of the realm of possibility if the network really grows.

It’s worth noting that a hundred dollars a day translates into a $36,500 annual income. Given that median household income in the U.S. is just over $51,000, this could be a viable source of income or at least a healthy supplement, so I think we need to be careful to not dismiss the potential here too easily.

There is a bit of a catch though. I personally am earning just a few pennies a day on Tsu but I’m not investing much there either right now. So, I asked another friend, “B,” who’s been sharing a lot of good content there. A and B are both quite active, but with one difference: B has just 250 or so family tree members (what Tsu calls B’s “network”), while A has nearly 3,500 network members. If you compare the number of views needed to generate $1 of royalty income on Tsu, B has to generate 14,772 views, while A has to just generate 10,661 views. In other words, with the smaller network, B has to generate 39% more views to earn the same royalties as A. That’s because A earns a slice of the royalties of the views generated by a much larger network of other people’s work.

In doing this analysis, I’ve come to believe that Tsu’s revenue hierarchy isn’t just a tool for accelerating user sign-ups. It’s also a tool for concentrating revenues in the hands of its most valuable end users. Why would Tsu want to do that? Two reasons.

First, value contributions can be quite skewed with user-contributed content. A small percentage of people often contribute a disproportionate share of the overall value and you want to be sure to take care of them. On Wikipedia, for example, 2% of the users account for 33% of the edits.

Second, a small number of high profile Tsu users with lots of friends and followers who are able to honestly say they make decent money on the network serves as a valuable source of inspiration and a way to boost confidence in the system.

So, I wonder whether this might be a deliberate design decision.  If everyone in the network earned the same, and it was just pennies a day, what good would that do to anyone? Tsu’s revenue hierarchy creates something very common in network structures: a power law, where a very small number of people secure most of the reward, while the vast majority secure very little.

What’s fair is a tricky question. When we do work and others do not, it seems fair that we should be compensated more. And yet, there is another, more egalitarian, sense of fairness that bridles when we see the rich getting richer in ways that make it impossible for others to catch up. In this sense, Tsu may well reflect some of paradoxical aspects of the American Dream and capitalism itself. All systems must be tuned to reflect our collective values, and Tsu proves that this is no less true when that system is shaped by algorithm. How they resolve this tension will be part of the key to their long-term success."
(http://www.the-vital-edge.com/not-the-product/)

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]