

=Description=

VANESSA LOPEZ GUZMAN:

"TUMBUH education is an interactive platform that offers an on-line and off-line to facilitate communication and content management to address different issues S.XXI learning for those in need. Because it is intended to involve the whole community on aspects of methodologies and good practice we see that the users will have an active role in responding to the appeal the principles of equity, universality and quality (respectful) through a series of resources provided by TUMBUH."


=Characteristics=

"The existing content on the platform are classified into four different levels of specificity exemplifying the form of a tree:

• Roots: Topics related to aspects of neuroscience in the learning process and the sociology of education.
• Trunk and branches: Methodologies to come to the knowledge of science.
• Leaves: Real examples of such practices in both formal and informal level.
• Raindrops: Access to private forums and public meetings and offline.


Whole Tumbuh idea is based on the following points:

1.Search for S.XXI education, and this leads to exit completely from the industrial education system where the important thing is to memorize and retener.

2.Search of the balance between the cultural and the globalizacion.

3.Reconcile "little cordial" relations between the different elements of education because education is lifelong and all todos.

4.Importance of equity, universality, dynamism, flexibility and respect. 

5.Importance of influencing the bases and processes since the content is already written. The question is how do you reach such knowledge?

6.The idea of community knowledge. It is important to note that knowledge multiplies to share."


[[Category:Education]]