
=Description=

Geordan Shannon and Jeremy Lauer:

"The Two Loops model describes the nonlinear dynamics of social transformation and is helpful for reflecting on where we situate our work and what we each can do to support change (Stilger, 2017, ch. 6; Wheatley & Frieze, 2006). The model is based on cycles of decay and emergence seen in living systems.

The first loop represents the dominant/incumbent system: how it grows, consolidates, and then decays. It brings attention to the need for stewardship of the current system, respecting those who depend on it, and for supporting its graceful death through hospice work. In this decay phase, the model draws attention to the preservation of components of the old system where relevant and supporting transitions when bridging to the new system. The second loop represents the emergent system. This is instigated and named by originators who can prototype and connect-up with others and brought into being through further relational connections and networks. The emergent system is nourished and energised by consolidated communities of practice, which helps ideas to become more concretized and practised. The system then becomes amplified and emerges as a system of influence. Interestingly, this model uses health and caregiving terms to describe how we support systems change: hospice refers to supporting the graceful death of the old system, midwifery refers to the birth of the new system, and nourishment refers to how the emergent system is supported and energised.

The two-loops process of change is not prescriptive or unidirectional, but instead allows us to reflect on our own role in systems change, and how we can use our strengths to support emergent paradigms. It also points to roles, actions and tools that may be useful to support emergent systems for planetary health."

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/18qyMz-SR-ryovR6IVf4iF2IMTrFJMLnY0fM6VJGCTU0/edit?)])


[[Category:Complexity]]

[[Category:Change Theory]]