
=Typology=

As proposed by Matthew McNatt:

Matt proposes "a distinction between 

(a) work that primarily relies on skills that society benefits from almost everyone having, vs. 

(b) work that relies on skills that society would not benefit from almost everyone having.


I claim that for Type-a work, the market will always under-compensate people relative to what they need to thrive. 

This is because the market tends to compensate people in direct proportion to the three D's: 

(1) the demand for what we do, 

(2) the difficulty to be had in replacing us, and 

(3) the damage we are capable of inflicting, should we and others choose to do so. 

Lower any one of these, and compensation drops. At risk of over-simplifying, marketing can increase D1; specialization can increase D2; and unionizing can increase D3. 

I further claim this distinction is important because it has the potential to shape how we nurture the commons. Even if what constitutes Type-a and Type-b work shifts over time, in any given moment: The more that instruction and tools for Type-b work are put in a global commons that's accessible to multinational corporations, the more we undermine our capacity—as people invested in P2P production—to fund our projects (including, potentially, alternative currencies to supplement the market income of people performing Type-a work). In contrast, the more that instruction and tools for Type-a work are put in a global commons, the more we all directly benefit."
(Discord, August 2020)

[[Category:Labor]]