
=Discussion=

Natalia Rodríguez Rivera & Mayo Fuster Morell:

"In this part, we will discuss three types of policy innovations: 

(1) Platforms —exploring the cases of ShareHub
Seoul (Korea), Oppla (European), ShareNL (Amsterdam), and
Decidim (Barcelona); 

(2) Policy Labs —examining the cases of
MaRS (Toronto), MindLab (Denmark), La 27 Region (France),
PolicyLab (UK), Helsinki Design Lab (Helsinki), and NESTA
ShareLab (UK); and 

(3) Challenges —considering the cases of
Koom (France), Helsinki Challenge (Helsinki), and City Game
Sharing (Amsterdam)."

From the conclusion:

"The challenge for states is to create an institutional framework and the necessary
infrastructure that allows for interaction and articulation between
different stakeholders to generate practical knowledge, which is, the
knowledge that can be translated into public policies or services
for more informed, efficient, and sustainable development.

Participatory and human-centred approaches to the design
of public policies articulated with other disciplines are one of
the possible ways to face these challenges, through a common
vision that generates value, insofar as it can create practical knowledge from more dialogues. And public services that respond to
common visions on issues affecting a large part of society has
occurred, including issues like the environment, economic models, health, and education, among others.

The diversity of examples that help illustrate the tools that
states can use, some typologies (platforms, labour policies and
challenges) were proposed. Many of these cases refer to collaborative processes that range from processes of reflection and
analysis to processes of decision making through the common
platform economy. These typologies share the participatory
design approach within their objectives, involving most stakeholders in their deliberative and design processes, however, not
all of the processes discussed are conceived as open structures."


==Platforms==

"Platforms are co-productive and deliberative platforms for the
exchange of ideas and knowledge between citizens, scientists, policymakers and the rest of stakeholders. Platforms are developed
by institutions or organizations (sometimes by the government) to
create and support a network (online and offline), that interrelates
the social, political and economic dimensions; they have the potential to be a means for experimentation and application of innovative tools. Platforms facilitate the production and dissemination of practical knowledge through different channels, and can also be a
training medium. The frequent online and offline interaction of all
actors brings together different perspectives and ensure discussion
of complex subjects (trying to overcome thinking in isolation).
Face-to-face meetings are usually carried out through workshops
which, according to Kaaronen (2016), are an effective way to make
policy recommendations and, at the same time, bring cognitive and
social benefits, by focusing on building trust and skills (Kaaronen,
2016). One of the challenges of some of these platforms, especially those of the FLOSS type (whose management and maintenance
depends on a collective), is to achieve a continuity in the time that
allows formulation of sustainable public policies; without jeopardizing their political neutrality by being funded by pressured third
parties (in Kaaronen, 2016; Zamparutti et al., 2012)."


==Policy Labs==

Policy Labs are an emergent and powerful methodology for
innovation in several areas (Tonurist et al., 2017), yet still limited,
and even more limited in the field of policy design (McGann 
Chapter I. Public innovation in platform economy…et al., 2018). Different policy labs are already in place, but our
knowledge of this emerging phenomenon remains very limited
(McGann et al., 2018; Bailey & Lloyd, 2016; Kimbell, 2015).
The setting up of civic labs to drive innovation in collaborative technologies is suggested as one of the key strategies for
rethinking digital policies in the city (Saunders & Baeck, 2015).
Policy Labs —a variant of Living Labs— are specialized
research bodies for public services design and public policies formulation in an experimental way. Their reference are user-centered
design and participatory design for activating the interaction of
all actors (citizens, civil servants, public, policy-makers and other
stakeholders) to produce practical knowledge that enables the
development of bottom-up proposals consistent with real needs
at different levels –local, regional or national– (Fuller & Lochard,
2016; García et al., 2016). Unlike Living Labs, most Policy Labs are
initiatives undertaken by members of a government, supported by
external designers and public innovation experts.
Although each has its own organization, structure, objectives
and programs, most apply design methodologies, focusing on
strategic design and services (Huybrechts et al., 2016), which also
include studies for ethnographic research, contextual research,
mapping, prototype testing, usability testing, and generative
methods (García et al., 2016). Fuller & Lochard (2016) point out
that these laboratories, in addition to co-designing and re-imagining public policies and programs, also develop a broad range of
activities such as preparing prospective studies, or creativity and
learning activities, through which they seek to empower all participants. On the other hand, there are also voices who are arguing for the need to ground design with deeper understandings of political theory (Escobar 2018). As well as the need to create
better assessments of the benefits of using design in the context
of policymaking, which is showing to impact the modulation
of organisational ways of knowing and performing competence
(Bailey & Lloyd 2016).

Currently, in some living labs, participatory design processes
are being integrated into the concept of infrastructuring, as a
way of dealing with complex problems, through establishing
long-term working relations with diverse actors (Huybrechts
et al., 2016). When speaking about infrastructure processes
it is fundamental “to set up, enable, and foster (physical and
abstract) democratic spaces that give room for to different and
conflicting voices and where actions are taken to mediate these
controversies or conflicts” (Bjögvinsson et al., 2012; Huybrechts
et al., 2016; Karasti, 2014). This process can be approached from
different perspectives, according to the particular needs, some
IT systems for work organisation, community settings, societal information infrastructures or formation of communities (Huybrechts et al., 2016). These laboratories are valuable because of their ability to articulate requirements (needs and/or desires)
from all participants in the form of more democratic dialogues.
Then the spaces that are generated allow mediating between different perspectives, many times (Huybrechts et al., 2016)."


==Challenges==

Another relevant format is introduced challenges or games
held as public competitions, organized (or sponsored) by public entities. Thanks to the Internet, new media and, above all,
the possibility of incentives (monetary and/or personal recognition) there are more initiatives based on the possibility of
activating participation from a wide range of social actors to
imagine more sustainable ways of solving complex problems
(Kaaronen, 2016). Many of these challenges have succeeded
in drawing the attention of those in charge of forming and
designing policies and public services, aware of the needs for
different perspectives on any given issue and the value behind
the interconnection of proposals, and practical knowledge.
Three examples are described below. The first one is interesting
because it not only activates the participation of citizens but
also its counterpart, allowing for the city council or companies
also to take action."
(http://www.share.barcelona/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/SharingCities_book.pdf)

=Source=

* Sharing Cities: A [[Worldwide Cities Overview on Platform Economy Policies]] with a focus on Barcelona. By Mayo Fuster Morell (ed.) et al. Dimmons Research Group, 2018.

URL = http://www.share.barcelona/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/SharingCities_book.pdf



[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Policy]]