

=Description=

George Por:

"The U process is a social technology for learning from the future as it emerges. (Scharmer, 2007) . Collective intelligence is not a static thing but an emergent, always-becoming quality of social holons. Its faculties include: collective sensing, meaning-making, planning, shared memory, and collaborative foresight. 

The following questions are examples of augmentation issues organized by the 5 cycles of the U: 


==Co-initiation==

When forming a new commons, what tools and practices will help its members moving from a collection of intelligences to collective intelligence?

How can a large group of diverse commoners, using visual maps of their diverse mental models, discover common ground and shared intent?


==Co-sensing==

When a commons issue has multiple stakeholders engaged in parallel or sequential conversations, what are the best known methods to connect and synergize them, help them making sense out of and appreciate each other’s contribution?

What pattern-seeking practices yield good maps of beneficial relationships in the socio-semantic web of those conversations?


==Co-presencing==
	
What methods of collective self-reflexivity are effective in raising the commons’ self-awareness to the level of discovering its highest potential?

How to cultivate the collective intuition needed to connect with a desired future already present in germ form in the present conditions?


==Co-creation==
	
How can natural and new commons co-author new narratives that will help them taking their space as agents of social coordination, next to the state and markets?

How to define the requirements for the forms and media the most suitable to create, adapt, and iterate innovative solutions to commons challenges?


==Co-evolving==

What practices, supported by social media, are particularly effective in facilitating peer to peer learning and communities of practice in the commons?

How can commons grow a high-diversity ecosystem of relationships with other commons, through harmonizing their innovation architecture? 


[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]