

=Description=

Peter Turchin:

"what has been called the ‘U-shaped curve of despotism’ in human evolution (p. 178) –
from highly inegalitarian great apes (whose social arrangements, presumably, also
characterized direct human ancestors) to egalitarian small-scale societies of huntergatherers,
and then to large-scale hierarchical societies with their great inequities in the
distribution of power, status, and wealth."


=Discussion=

Peter Turchin:

"In his discussion of the despotic U-curve Bellah relies on Christopher Boehm’s
[[Hierarchy in the Forest]]: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior. Bellah gives a
sympathetic and accurate account of this important book (one of many strengths of
Religion in Human Evolution is the author’s ability to range across a very broad spectrum
of social and natural disciplines). The main message of Boehm’s book is that equality
does not simply happen because hunter-gatherers are poor and cannot accumulate much
wealth. On the contrary, Boehm argues that equality requires active maintenance. People
living in small-scale societies possess numerous norms and institutions designed to
control ‘upstarts,’ those individuals who attempt to dominate others in order to control an
unfair share of resources. The sanctions deployed against upstarts range from gossip and
ridicule to ostracism and, ultimately, assassination. As Bellah concurs, Boehm does a
very good job in describing how this system of escalating sanctions works in small-scale
societies, although “he is perhaps less good at what I think is equally necessary, that is,
the strong pull of social solidarity, especially as expressed in ritual, that rewards
renunciation of dominance with a sense of full social acceptance” (p. 177). This sounds
like an interesting idea, although it is not further developed in Bellah’s book."


=Source=

Religion and Empire in the Axial Age. Invited Article for Religion, Brain & Behavior

=More Information=

Turchin discusses:

*  The book by Robert Bellah. Religion in Human Evolution (see: [[Religion and Equality in Human Evolution]])

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]