
'''= "refers to vertical integration of the customer experience within a specific industry".'''


=Description=

Ali Diallo:

"The uberification of society, on-demand services, and the new sharing nature of the American economy have all contributed to the creation of the venture building ecosystem. The term uberification, which is derived from the popular on-demand taxi service Uber, refers to vertical integration of the customer experience within a specific industry. The uberification effect creates on-demand services that in turn create a new sharing economy that redefines the way society accesses resources. [[Venture Builders]] help enhance this access by building powerful networks and ecosystems from which resources can be instantly pulled. Thus, they are the shapers of the sharing economy. Analysts and thought leaders define the sharing economy as a socio-economic ecosystem built around the sharing of resources. It includes the shared creation, production, distribution, trade, and consumption of goods and services by different people and organizations.

According to Steve Schlafman, a Principal at RRE Ventures, the uberification of our economy signals a fundamental shift in the way local services are discovered and fulfilled. Entrepreneurs should take this concept to the next level by not only enhancing a specific industry but also by radically transforming the startup business model and, ultimately, the way society generates income."
(http://venturebeat.com/2015/01/18/how-venture-builders-are-changing-the-startup-model/)


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Netarchical Capitalism]]