'''Ubuntu Linux, 'Linux for Human Beings''''

URL = http://www.ubuntulinux.org/

For extensive treatment, see the entry on [[Ubuntu]]


=Description=

"Ubuntu" is an ancient African word, meaning "humanity to others". Ubuntu also means "I am what I am because of who we all are". The Ubuntu Linux distribution brings the spirit of Ubuntu to the software world. Ubuntu is a complete Linux-based operating system, freely available with both community and professional support. The Ubuntu community is built on the ideas enshrined in the Ubuntu Manifesto: that software should be available free of charge, that software tools should be usable by people in their local language and despite any disabilities, and that people should have the freedom to customise and alter their software in whatever way they see fit.

Other easy to use packages are Xandros, http://www.xandros.com/  and Linspire, http://www.linspire.com/

if you're not a tinkerer or a self-described power user, and if you use your machine mainly for a few key tasks (Web, e-mail, office apps, music, photos), then what I want you to do is shell out some cold, hard cash for a copy of Xandros Desktop OS Deluxe Edition 3.0. This is about as friendly as Linux gets: The box, which is covered mainly with an impressive list of features, should have a "Zero Linux Experience Required" sticker on it. Inside, along with the installation discs, is an extremely well-laid-out, 350-page user manual with a 24-page index. It's likely to be all the hand-holding you'll need. (http://www.pcworld.com/howto/article/0,aid,119360,00.asp )

With version Five-0, Linspire has crafted a Linux operating system that just about anyone can use--but these days, such a thing really isn't all that unique. Unfortunately, Linspire Five-0 distinguishes itself only with its custom applications and its penchant for repeatedly clawing at your wallet. Better Linux alternatives are out there.
(http://www.pcworld.com/reviews/article/0,aid,120096,00.asp)

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Technology]]