
= founder of the Kaos Pilots school


=Bio=

Via Geert Callens:

Uffe Elbæk (born 15 June 1954) is the founder and former Principal of the KaosPilots International School of New Business Design and Social Innovation, located in Aarhus. The KaosPilots school inspired the creation of several international schools, located in Norway, Sweden and the Netherlands.

Elbæk previously was a politician of the Danish Social Liberal Party.

From 2007 to 2009, Elbæk served as the CEO for the 2009 World Outgames.

In July 2010, Elbæk founded the consulting company Change The Game with the focus on leadership training, political campaigning and social innovation concepts. Elbæk served as special advisor for the leadership team at the KaosPilots and as an academic adviser for the HKICC Lee Shau Kee School of Creativityin Hong Kong.

Elbæk won a seat in the Folketing for the Danish Social Liberal Party in the 2011 Danish parliamentary election. On 3 October 2011 he was appointed Culture Minister of Denmark in Cabinet of Helle Thorning-Schmidt. He resigned as minister in December 2012 after he was criticized for having held five official arrangements at an institution where he previously was chairman and where his husband worked.[1] The national audit agency of Denmark later concluded that he had not had a conflict of interest. The ministry was criticized for some other facets related to the case. In 2013, he resumed his work in the Folketing.
Elbæk lives with Jens Pedersen in a registered partnership.


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Denmark]]