= mulitdisciplinary Italian legal scholary who is very active around the re-emergence of a european commons tradition and in particular, commons law.

=Bio=

Professor of Civil Law at  Università degli Studi di Torino and an Alfred & Hanna Fromm Distinguished  Professor of International and Comparative Law at University of California,  Hastings College of Law. Member of Accademia Internazionale di Diritto  Comparato, Editor in Chief of Global Jurist online magazine, member of the  Board of the American Journal of Comparative Law, the International Revue of  Law and Economics, the Rivista Critica del Diritto Privato and General Editor  of the project The Common Core of European Private Law.                               


'''From the Wikipedia:'''

"Ugo Mattei (born 1961 in Turin, Piedmont) is the Alfred and Hanna Fromm Professor of International and Comparative Law at the University of California, Hastings College of the Law, in San Francisco, California and a full Professor of Civil Law in the University of Turin, Italy. He is the Academic Coordinator of the International University College of Turin, Italy, a radically new school where issues of law and finance in global capitalism are critically approached. He is also currently a columnist for the Italian communist newspaper Il Manifesto.

Mattei was born in Turin, Italy, in 1961. He graduated first in his class in 1983 from the Law School of the University of Turin and he received his LL.M. from Boalt Hall (University of California, Berkeley School of Law) in 1989 where he was a Fulbright Fellow. He also attended the London School of Economics and the Faculté Internationale de Droit Comparé in Strasbourg.

Mattei has been a visiting scholar at Yale Law School and the University of Cambridge (Trinity College and Wolfson College), and a visiting professor at Oslo, Berkeley, Montpellier, Macau. In 1985 he joined the law school of the University of Trento as an assistant professor and he received tenure as a full professor in 1990. In Trento he taught civil law and Introduction to African Law and Institutions. In 1992 he was appointed as a professor in the Faculté Internationale de Droit Comparé (Strasbourg), where he served for four years.

In 1993, Mattei taught as a visiting professor on the U.C. Hastings faculty. In 1994 he was appointed to the Hastings faculty as the first holder of the Fromm Chair in International and Comparative Law, succeeding Rudolf Schlesinger in teaching comparative law. He also teaches Law and Economics. In 1997 he accepted a call from the University of Turin, Faculty of Law to succeed the famous Italian scholar Rodolfo Sacco in the Chair of Civil Law. He is a Full Member of the International Academy of Comparative Law, a member of the Executive Committee of the American Society of Comparative Law, a member of the Advisory Board of the Friburg Institute of Comparative Law, an advisor to the Institute of Law, Economics and Finances at Copenhagen Business School, a General Editor of the Series Common Core of European Private Law (Trento Project) at Cambridge University Press, a series editor of European Private Law in Context at Kluwer International and an editor in chief of Global Jurist. He is a member of the Editorial Board of the International Review of Law and Economics and of New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics and Law.

Mattei’s scholarship is broadly multi-disciplinary. Mattei has published many books and more than one hundred other publications in English, Italian, French, Portuguese, Russian, and Chinese. His last book in English, written with anthropologist Laura Nader, is Plunder: When the Rule of Law is Illegal.

Ugo Mattei has recently oriented the focus of his research on the study of commons. He is currently leading a project on commons with Saki Bailey (International University College of Turin) and Filippo Valguarnera (Örebro University) in the context of the Common Core of European Private Law."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ugo_Mattei)

=More Information=

* http://redroom.com/member/ugo-mattei/blog
* Interview with [[Ugo_Mattei_on_the_Commons_Movement_in_Italy|Ugo Mattei]]. 


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Italy]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]