
'''* Article: Introducing Ulimisana Optimization Algorithm Based on Ubuntu Philosophy. Tshifhiwa Maumela; Fulufhelo Ṋelwamondo; Tshilidzi Marwala.  IEEE Access ( Volume: 8), 2020.'''

URL = https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9205897


=Description=

"In this paper we give introduction to the concepts of Ubuntu and how we used Mechanism design concepts to construct Ubuntu as an optimisation algorithm. Ubuntu philosophy is old and consists of many oral proverbs that have been documented in recent years. This work thus '''introduces an incentive mechanism based on Ubuntu, thus called Ubuntu Incentive, which is modelled according to Mechanism Design principles'''. This incentive scheme is introduced as a fitness function which the algorithm tries to improve. To achieve this, the algorithm draws inspiration from Bantu proverbs that guide how individuals ought to behave within the Ubuntu community. Trust is an important element within these communities and it is shown how trust influences the obtaining of the Pareto efficiency. The algorithm is introduced with different mathematical configurations which are tested against each other. Ulimisana optimisation algorithm (UOA) manages to solve the benchmark test functions used in this work. This is found to be in accordance to the Ubuntu philosophy as used in the Ulimisana/Letsema practice amongst the Bantu people of Southern Africa."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Africa]]

[[Category:Cooperation]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]

[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]
[[Category:Neotraditional]]