
'''= "relations of open reciprocity, communal sharing, gift-giving and voluntary collaboration allowed value to circulate in its unalienated forms, including labor power, political expression and interspecies ecological exchanges".''' [http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52847/49997]


=Description=

Ron Eglash:

"Marx proposed that capitalism’s destructive force is caused, at root, by the alienation of
labor value from its generators. Environmentalists have added the concept of unalienated
ecological value, and rights activists added the unalienated expressive value of free speech,
sexuality, spirituality, etc. Marx’s vision for restoring an unalienated world by top-down
economic governance was never fulfilled. But in the last 30 years, new forms of social justice
have emerged that operate as “bottom-up”. Peer-to-peer production such as open source
software or wikipedia has challenged the corporate grip on IP in a “gift exchange” of labor
value; community based agroecology establishes a kind of gift exchange with our nonhuman
allies in nature. DIY citizenship from feminist makerspaces to queer biohacking has profound
implications for a new materialism of the “knowledge commons”; and restorative approaches
to civil rights can challenge the prison-industrial complex. In contrast to top-down
“distributive justice,” all of the above are cases of bottom-up or “generative justice”."
(http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52847/49997)


=Typology=

Ron Eglash:

1) Unalienated labor value -- as Marx notes, when labor is alienated from its products, the work becomes meaningless. That is why Barrington-Leigh's examples of open source, where coders often work on passion projects, is so important.

2) Unalienated ecological value -- extracting value from soil, and returning chemicals, is like extracting labor value from workers and returning money. Chemical "amendments" destroy soil ecosystems like consumerism destroys communities.

3) Unalienated expressive value -- free speech, authentic identity around sexuality, spirituality etc., has to feed from the same well springs, and vice-versa.


=Discussion=

==Generating unalienated value==

Ron Eglash:

"In Marx’s original formulation of “alienated labor value”, he contrasted the meaningful work
of traditional skilled artisans, taking pleasure in their craft and earning respect from their
community, with the dull repetition, low pay and enervating conditions of factory labor under
capitalism. There are at least four challenges to making the alienation concept useful today.
First, corporate marketing schemes are increasingly appropriating the artisanal allure: my
Starbucks coffee is served by an underpaid “barista”; my cookies claim they were hand-made
by Keebler elves. I can buy Domino’s Artisan Pizzas, Tostitos’ Artisan Recipes Tortilla Chips,
Burger King’s Artisan bun, and Dunkin’ Donuts’ Artisan Bagels. If artisanal labor is so easily
simulated, what chance do we have for making it a basis of social critique? Second, evoking
older, pre-capitalist forms could be read to imply that artisanal labor is better because it is
more natural. But as I will outline below, some of the best examples of unalienated craft labor
today are in highly “unnatural” realms of open source hardware and software. And romantic
organicist notions of what constitutes “natural” labor are notoriously tied to stereotype gender
roles; homophobic claims that only heterosexuality is natural; nationalist claims that “nature
did not intend the races to mix” and so on. Third, older production forms may be a poor fit to
contemporary population densities and needs. And finally, the stress on artisanal production
often overlooks the gender, race and ecological dimensions of economies of care and histories
of colonialism. To address these problems, we need a deeper look at what the concept of
“generating unalienated value” could mean if liberated from some of this unwelcomed
baggage.

The phrase “generating value” is implicitly referring to the power of “self-generation.” In
his 1944 book What is Life? physicist Erwin Schrödinger noted the mysterious way organisms
seemed to defy the second law of thermodynamics: “It is by avoiding the rapid decay into the
inert state of 'equilibrium' that an organism appears so enigmatic; so much so, that from the
earliest times of human thought some special non-physical or supernatural force... was
claimed to be operative” (p. 70). He characterized this self-generative property of life as
“negative entropy” (later shortened to “negentropy”). Terms for this phenomenon can now be
found at every scale: “autocatalysis” for cycles in which biomolecules produced themselves;
“autopoiesis” for an organism’s self-reproduction; “sympoiesis” for ecosystem self-assembly,
and so on. When we grow living organisms for food, we tap into this self-generating power;
that is to say, some of the value that is normally circulated can be diverted for our own use. It
is here that we must choose between either becoming part of the circulation, or extracting—
i.e. alienating—that value. Soils for example can be easily depleted of nutrients. Yet
traditional farmers and horticulturalists have avoided this problem for thousands of years
simply by returning our waste to the soil, and thus becoming part of the circulation of value
through a broader array of sustainable practices called agroecology.

Marx made an analogy between unalienated labor and agroecology in Capital volume 1,
where he stated that capitalist farming “prevents the return to the soil of its constituent
elements consumed by man in the form of food and clothing... All progress in capitalist
agriculture is a progress in the art, not only of robbing the worker, but of robbing the soil...”
(Marx 1976, pp. 637-638). Recalling Schrödinger’s comment that the negentropic character
of life is often attributed to a supernatural force, it is no surprise that Marx’s inspiration for
this insight, German chemist Justus von Liebig, originally justified recycling sewage back to
farm lands because of a “vital force” that gave living soils their generative power.
Marx was dedicated to eliminating “mystification”, but when he invokes the “living labor”
of unalienated production, it sounds suspiciously like the vitalist “living soil” of von Liebig.
This is not necessarily a flaw. Granted, it does pose the dangers of any organicist or
naturalizing discourse, as noted above. But one can also interpret vitalism as humility; as a
way of saying “there is something complex and wonderful in the generative force that we do
not fully understand”. Indeed that was Schrödinger’s final conclusion. Today we know that the
“living soil” concept was not far off: ordinary dirt is a complex ecosystem of bacteria, fungi,
nematodes, decaying matter, water percolation, minerals and other features that form a
dynamic, evolving network which still challenges our understanding. Analogous complex, selfsustaining
networks in the social domain—not the simulation of artisanal labor in the
Starbucks barista or Keebler elf—are necessary for real unalienated labor. We will now turn
to one exemplar for such a network. "
(http://revistas.ucm.es/index.php/TEKN/article/view/52847/49997)


==History of the Concept: Smith and Marx==

==[[Unalienated Value]] and self-generation==

Ron Eglash:

"In  contrast to  Smith’s  claim  that  industrial  capital  offered  a  self-generating  source  of  value, Marx  focused  on  labor  and  nature  as  the  only  components  that  are  truly  self-generating1. Some  of  his  best  examples are  the  indigenous  societies  described  in  his Ethnological Note-books.   Drawing on Lewis Morgan’s  work with the Iroquois and other early anthropologists, Marx  noted  that  in  these  indigenous  societies  the  labor  that  goes  into  growing  a  bushel  of corn  or  crafting a knife  is  visible rather  than  hidden,  and relations  of  reciprocity,  communal sharing,  and  gift-giving,  rather  than  cold  blooded  calculation,  allowed  that  labor  value  to circulate  in  an  unalienated  form  (Graeber,  2012).  While  not  all  indigenous  societies  were egalitarian,  examples  such  as the Iroquois, who had a  rich  structure  for democratic decision-making--establishing  women’s  voting  rights  500  years  before  any  European nation  did so—were  ample  evidence that  without  the wealth  inequality  created  by  capitalism, deep  political equality  would  be  possible.From  the  viewpoint of Adam  Smith,  the economic  value  of a  commodity  is the  revenue you  get  by  selling  it,  so  it  is  only  common  sense  that  the  owner  of a  factory  owns  all  its profits.  For  Marx the owner  of  the factory is extracting  value  from the  labor  that  generated it, and unethically  hoarding  that  value  in the  form of profits. Workers  are  complacent  in  part because  the  monetary  system of banks  and  bills  makes the hording  invisible:  I don’t see my boss putting a thousand ears of corn in his wallet, while only 10 ears go into mine. But they are  also  complacent  because  replacing  the  experience  of  artisanal  production—pride  in crafting,  contributing  and  communing  with  tools,  users  and  resources—with  the  mind numbing  alienation  of  mass  production  drastically  changes  one’s  perspective:  consumption becomes  the  only  form  of  identity,  and  social,  cultural  and  political  structures  begin  to  re-flect  the consumer  mentality.

In  addition  to unalienated  labor  value,  Marx eventually  noted  the importance  of  unalien-ated ecological  value.  In  earlier  writing  (letter of January 7, 1851) he scoffed at the need for environmental  protection  because  of  “the  progress  of  science  and  industry.”  But  by  the 1860s, inspired  by  the  new soil  chemistry  studies of Justus von Liebig  (Foster  and  Magdoff, 2011),  he  critiqued  capitalist  agriculture  for  the  way  it  “disturbs  the  metabolic  interaction between  man  and  the  earth, i.e.  it  prevents  the  return  to  the soil  of  its  constituent  elements consumed  by  man in  the  form of  food  and clothing...All  progress  in capitalist  agriculture is a progress  in  the  art, not only of robbing  the  worker, but  of  robbing  the  soil...” (Marx 1976, pp.  637-638).Although  not  emphasized  as  much  as  labor  and  nature,  Marx  also  mapped  out  a  third form  which  I  will  refer to  as  “expressive”  value.  In the Grundrisse,  he  predicted  that  tech-nological  improvements  under  communism  would  create  so  much  wealth  that  workers would  have  abundant  free  time  in  the  form  of  unalienated  intellectual  pursuits,  arts,  recre-ation,  and  other  creative  and  emotional  expressions.  As  a  practicing  journalist  for  most  of his  career  (publishing  362  articles  in The New York Tribune  alone),  Marx  also  highlighted expressive  value  in media:  “The  free press  is  the ubiquitous  vigilant eye  of  a people's  soul, the embodiment  of  a  people's  faith  in  itself” (Marx, 1842)

...

With  these  three  pillars  of  unalienated  labor,  ecological,  and  expressive  value,  one can  un-derstand  the  optimism of  the  1917  revolution in  what  would  become the  USSR.  It’s  hard  to imagine  a more  horrifyingly  failed  vision.  Rather than  return  people  to  the  egalitarian  rela-tions  of  indigenous  societies,  the  USSR  was  marked  by  widespread  poverty,  income inequality, environmental  degradation, rampant  militarism and  a  human  rights  record so  bad that  new  terms  like  “Orwellian”  had  to  be  created  for  it.  Davies  (1998) for  example  notes that  the  death  toll  due  to  Stalin-era  economic  policies  has  been  estimated  at  10  million. Even  with  “cost  savings”  measures  such  as  forced  labor  camps,  about  30  million  (one  of every  8  citizens) were still  living in poverty  by  the dissolution  in  1990  (Slay,  2009). Where did Marxist  analysis  go  wrong?In  all  three  domains  Marx  demonstrated  the  advantages  of  unalienated  forms.  But  his model  of  communism  could  not  accommodate  the  very  phenomena  he  used  to  justify  it. Figure  2  shows  the  flow of value  under  communism: as  in  the  case of Adam Smith’s capit-alist  system, it  communism  required  that  value  must be extracted.  In part that  was  required by centralization,  which  Marx saw as the only means  to  redistribute  value.   His 1848 Mani-festo of the Communist Party calls for  strict  centralization of “all instruments  of  production” (factories,  machines,  agricultural  estates,  mines,  etc.)  as  well  as  finances,  communication, transportation,  and  even  the  workforce--an  “industrial  army”--in  the  hands  of  the  state (1974,  pp.  86-87).  But  equally  important  was  Marx’s  conviction  that  the  unalienated  labor of  traditional  cultures  was  simply  too  inefficient.  Providing  barely  enough  for  subsistence; it  could  not rise beyond  “nature’s  paltriness”  (Natur-bedurftigkeit).  Capitalism was a  neces-sary  stage  before communism  because  it could  condense  the labor  value  of past  generations into  increasingly  efficient  technologies.It  was this  requirement  of  extraction,  and  its  corollary of  centralized  redistribution,  that created  the  ideology  and methods at  the  heart  of the USSR disasters.  Labor  value extraction turned out to be as alienating under  communism  as  it  was under capitalism.   Nature’s  contri-bution  to  the  generation  of  value  was  similarly  betrayed:  plants  came  out  of  farms,  but organic  waste  was  not brought back  to  the soil. Artificial phosphorus  additives  in the  USSR became  so  high  that  following  its  dissolution  in  1990,  world  phosphorus  consumption dropped for a decade  (MIT, 2011)."
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304670572_Of_Marx_and_Makers_an_Historical_Perspective_on_Generative_Justice)

=More Information=

* Ron Eglash: "This is explained in depth in our publications: www.generativejustice.wikispaces.com/home. Practical implementations are discussed here: www.generativejustice.wikispaces.com/Projects."

* [[Generative Justice]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]