

URL = http://unclasses.org/


=Description=

"what we hope will make (un)classes truly special is the community. We want to foster an environment for fun people to explore mutual interests in stress-free social settings. And you are in charge: wanna learn something no one is teaching, create a class and recruit a teacher; have a hobby you love and want to share, offer to teach it and assemble some students.


'''How does it work?''' unclasses.org is a simple site that connects people who want to learn about a topic with those in their area who want to teach it. It’s basically a marketplace for matching interest with passion. The actual (un)classes can be whatever you want them to be. People in your area suggest things they want to learn, others join, and someone volunteers to teach. It’s that simple.

(un)classes are meant to be lightweight, fun, and unconventional -- the kinds of things you can't easily learn elsewhere. Some of our favorites so far include 'shopping for yore lady', 'How to Create The Greatest Rock Song of All Time', and 'how to be a digital nomad'. The system is set up to encourage creativity and keep things informal, so the only guidelines are the standard don't be offensive or do things that are illegal.

Here are the basics of how the system works:

* Anyone can create a new Class, all they have to put in is a name, description, and area for the Class
    
* Anyone can become a Student of a Class, but try not to flake out if you say you're going to be there (or just drop the Class if your plans change)
    
* Anyone can become a Teacher of a Class, but there can only be one Teacher at a time
(http://unclasses.org/about)


=More Information=

Similar initiatives at http://www.brainpickings.org/index.php/2010/01/21/alt-education/

#[[University of the People]]
#[[Skillsharing]]
#[[Supercool School]]
#[[School of Everything]]


[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Resources]]