=Discussion=
 
'''1. Kenan Malik:'''
 
“At the heart of unconscious bias training is a controversial psychological technique called “implicit-association test”, or IAT. First introduced in 1998, IAT tests for the speed at which you associate particular categories, black people and white people, for instance, with “good” and “bad” attributes (“violent” or “intelligent”). Individuals who are quicker to associate black people with violence or white people with intelligence are supposedly revealing their hidden biases.

There is, though, little evidence that this is true. People tested several times often receive very different scores. A meta-analysis of almost 500 studies found that training has only a “weak” effect on an individual’s implicit-bias score, and none on their behaviour.

The biggest problem, though, is that which Sivanandan and Lasch-Quinn warned about: the shift of focus from social change to personal therapy. Nobody actually says, “we don’t want to change society”. But by focusing on whiteness and personal psychology, the significance of laws and social structures is downgraded in favour of unconscious thought.

The therapeutic approach, Sivanandan presciently observed, turns racism into “a combination of mental illness, original sin and biological determinism”, an “‘essence’ that history has deposited in the white psyche”. Because “there is no escaping it” – all white people are racist either consciously or unconsciously – it’s an outlook that is both pessimistic and divisive.”
(https://amp.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/jul/12/enough-of-the-psychobabble-racism-is-not-something-to-fix-with-therapy?)


'''2. Steven J. Lawrence:'''

"Although it’s popular in the Diversity, Equity and Inclusion consulting industry, unconscious bias training is not only based on the harmful foundation of group identity essentialism and its accompanying endorsement of installing social hierarchies in communities in which this training has been introduced, it is largely regarded as unscientific in its findings and unethical in its implementation. 

Journalist Jesse Singal’s comprehensive analysis of the increasingly discredited Implicit Bias Test provides a window into why the idea of unconscious bias continues to be alluring despite its decreasing legitimacy among members of the scientific community. In addition, a 2020 study showed that “White Privilege” training does not significantly increase empathy towards people of color. When this type of training is based on the unfalsifiable presumption of “unconscious bias” in individuals who belong to specific demographic groups, there is not much of an argument for the “added value” of these trainings for companies and organizations. And when we consider that this very same study showed a severe decrease of empathy for poor white people in white participants after white privilege trainings, it’s hard to deny the strong probability that these trainings are actively harmful for all people who participate in them and, by extension, those who have the misfortune of interacting with them now that they have ingested what can reasonably called a mind virus that urges its hosts to presume evil, badness, and bad intentions everywhere, in all people, and in all places. 

More studies are demonstrating the lack of necessity for training programs that are based on presuppositions about the inner lives of individuals who belong to specific demographic groups, regardless of whether these presuppositions are positive or negative. On January 26, 2021, a study was published which revealed a surprising pattern around racial attitudes in white people. It was discovered, implementing the commonly used measuring rubric, the Racial Resentment Scale (RRS) that—contrary to popular conceptions— whites favor Blacks “substantially” more than their own in-group (whites) far more than was previously known. This indicates that more work needs to be done in understanding the complex dynamics of inter-group trust and collaboration and that the “trainings” that are introduced into communities and companies that wish to be seen as addressing Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion might need to be integrated with a less ideological stance than the current offerings.

To put it more simply, if research is showing that white workers—especially in largely progressive environments—tend to disfavor their own in-group and “substantially” favor people from the out-groups (people of color), then in the best possible circumstances, these trainings are redundant.

If a workplace wants to be seen as on the cutting edge of being deeply inclusive, diverse and equity oriented, then the organization needs to recognize and integrate the findings of these studies. Being up to date on the research can help organizations to re-evaluate the effectiveness and legitimacy of programs that have been designed to enhance workplaces towards maximum harmony, mutual respect and productivity and away from strife, abuse and breakdown. In doing so, managers and leaders will find that workplace and educational training programs and larger cultural movements that are based on group identity essentialism—with its attendant behavioral attitudes and consequent endorsement of social hierarchies among those who have taken on those essentialist beliefs—are often not only ineffective and unnecessary, but also actively harmful.

It’s the active harm that these training programs can potentially bring to groups of people that needs to be addressed, especially in light of the proliferation of group identity theories in the media, education, government, activist communities, non profit organizations, corporations, and religious communities. With the accompanying spread of group identity essentialism in all these areas of society, the outcomes of these trainings on society as a whole are more deserving of our attention and careful study than ever before."
(https://groundexperience.substack.com/p/training-in-cynicism)

=Discussion 2: Analysis from the [[Free Speech Union=

==  What is Unconscious Bias Training and how does it relate to the [[Implicit Association Test]]?  ==

Free Speech Union:

"Unconscious Bias Training (UBT) is also known as Anti-Bias or Implicit Bias Training. Anti-Racism Training  is  a  highly  ideological  form  of  UBT  described here.  The creators of the IAT initially claimed that widespread implicit bias was responsible for the remaining disparities in outcome between racial groups. They stated that:[G]iven the relatively small proportion of people who are overtly prejudiced  and how  clearly  it is established  that automatic  race preference predicts discrimination, it is reasonable to conclude not only that implicit bias is a cause of Black disadvantage but also that  it  plausibly  plays  a  greater  role  than  does  explicit  bias  in  
explaining the discrimination that contributes to Black disadvantage.’51  As  we  have  discussed,  there  is  little  evidence  to  support  the  assertion  that ‘automatic race preference predicts discrimination’ (discussed here) or that implicit prejudices play a more significant role in discrimination than explicit ones (discussed here). Nonetheless, informed by this understanding UBT identifies implicit bias as contributing to ongoing racial inequality. UBT aims to train people to recognise and reduce their levels of implicit bias. Taking an IAT is sometimes, but not always, part of UBT.


==Is Unconscious Bias Training ideologically motivated?==

UBT varies considerably by provider. Some trainings are heavily influenced by ideological beliefs and questionable science. Others are less ideologically motivated and are less reliant on implicit bias as a scientific concept.

Critical Race Theory: The belief that implicit, unconscious prejudice is a driver of modern racial inequality is central to the controversial academic discipline  of  critical  race  theory  (CRT). You  can  read  more  about  CRT  here.  Robin  DiAngelo,  a  leading  CRT  scholar,  has  been  described  as  ‘the... most visible expert in anti-bias training’.52 Anti-Racism Training is a specific type of UBT incorporating the ideas of CRT and often relies on contested  concepts  of  ‘whiteness,’  ‘privilege,’  ‘oppression’  and  ‘white  fragility’. UBT that is heavily influenced by the disputed ideas of CRT can be highly ideological in nature, but not all UBT incorporates CRT. UBT is a profitable industry: The UBT industry earns tens of billions of dollars a year53 and leading anti-bias trainers like Robin DiAngelo charge as much as $20,000 per session.54 UBT has been successfully marketed as a way for employers to meet their obligations under the Equality Act 2020 and create more welcoming and racially diverse work environments. UBT has become common place in many organisations. But as is explained here,  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  UBT  is  effective  in  making  workplaces more racially diverse, and some evidence that it is actively counterproductive. It is worth acknowledging that companies marketing UBT may be financially motivated to promote the view that reducing implicit bias is a valid and effective approach to diversity. Lack of expertise: UBT instructors are generally not trained in psychological science,  although  they  often  advertise  their  courses  as  supported  by  scientific evidence. They are frequently unaware of the second generation of IAT research, which discredited the test’s initial findings about racial prejudice. Some claim that the validity of the IAT is irrelevant to the utility of UBT. Instead, their trainings emphasise the importance of understanding in-group  favouritism  and  the  effect  of  implicit  associations  on  decision  making  more  generally.  Many  UBT  providers  sincerely  believe  that  reducing  implicit  bias  is  a  valid  approach  to  building  a  better  society.  This should be recognised and respected as a valid ideological belief, but other people should not come under pressure to endorse it if it is in conflict with their own principled beliefs.


==How does Unconscious Bias Training work?==

This section explores some of the common themes in UBT, but training is offered by many different providers and will vary accordingly. You can find links to articles about people’s experiences of UBT here.


Introducing the concept of Implicit Bias: UBT commonly introduces the concept of implicit bias as an invisible process of thought. According to UBT, this unconscious thought process constantly impacts our behaviour, perpetuating  prejudice  without  our  conscious  awareness.  Fatalistic,  subjective assertions like, ‘We are all biased. We can’t help it’ are often presented as undisputable facts.  Based  on  an  unsupported  claim  –  that  unconscious  prejudice  effects  important real-world events55 – UBT frequently identifies implicit bias as a major unrecognised factor in workplace discrimination. UBT often states that  it  is  essential  for  businesses  to  reduce  implicit  bias  in  order  to  be  diverse and welcoming to minorities. You can read more about the validity of this claim here. Awareness raising: UBT’s central technique for reducing implicit bias is awareness raising. Participants are told that they have a responsibility to work  at  recognising  implicit  bias  and  must  actively  compensate  for  its  influence at all times. You can read more about the impact of cultivating this state of hyper-awareness in the workplace here and its validity as a means of reducing implicit bias here. 
Perception is suspect: Many people are sceptical of the idea that our behaviour is largely controlled by unconscious influences. Our justice system assigns responsibility according to intent and we are not used to  excusing  prejudiced  behaviour  on  the  basis  of  uncontrollable  subconscious  impulses.  Discrimination  is  usually  recognised  as  a  conscious decision indicative of poor character, and we hold individuals accountable for choosing to behave in prejudiced ways. UBT may try to address this scepticism by claiming that human perception is inherently inaccurate. Some trainings use optical illusions as evidence that our brains sometimes perceive things incorrectly. However, as discussed here and here, there is a considerable difference between recognising that our minds associate concepts in memory, sometimes inaccurately, and the value judgement that this signifies implicit racial prejudice. Establishing positionality:  Anti-Racism Training or UBT heavily influenced by Critical Race Theory may employ variations on an exercise called the ‘Privilege Walk’. This aims to demonstrate the invisible forces of ‘privilege’ and ‘oppression’ that CRT identifies as the dominant powers in society. In the context of UBT, it could be thought of as a visual representation of 
participants’ levels of perceived implicit bias and an effort to achieve the core aim of awareness raising described here.56 Participants form a line in the middle of the room all facing in one direction. Statements like the following are read out:– If you went to university take one step forward.– If you come from a broken home take one step backward.–  If you have experienced discrimination on the basis of your race take one step backward.–      If  your  parents  were  white  collar  professionals  take  one  step  forward.You can read a more complete list here.By the end of the exercise people CRT identifies as ‘privileged’ will be standing on one side of the room and people identified as ‘oppressed’ will be on the other. The division often appears to reflect the racial disparities we see in society more broadly.In  highly  ideological Anti-Racism Training  there  may  be  a  very  clear  attribution  of  virtue  to  the  ‘oppressed’  group  and  wrongdoing  to  the  ‘privileged’  group,  regardless  of  the  intentions  or  experiences  of  the  individuals concerned. These characterisations may exacerbate divisive thinking  and  cause  resentment,  as  described  here. A  black  participant  who  has  overcome  adversity  may  justifiably  resent  being  labelled  ‘oppressed’. Equally, a white participant labelled ‘privileged’ may feel that this  minimises  their  own  experiences  of  adversity.  In  both  cases,  the  statements  used  in  exercises  like  the  Privilege  Walk  attempt  to  divide  people into homogenous identity categories that usually fail to reflect the diverse experiences and views of the individuals composing them.This  process  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  ‘establishing  positionality’  in  Critical Social Justice literature. Anti-Racism Training may ask participants to reflect deeply on their positionality, identify times when they benefited from ‘privilege’ at the expense of inflicting ‘oppression’ on marginalised groups and, in extreme cases, require ‘privileged’ participants to apologise to those identified as ‘oppressed’, ostensibly to reduce levels of implicit racial prejudice.57 It is important to note that not all UBT incorporates these controversial ideas.


==Questioning  your  biases:==  

UBT  often  sets  participants  self-reflection  questions like:–  Do you believe you judge people based on their physical appearance?– Do you like to think of yourself as a fair person? Of course, most people try not to judge others on their physical appearance and like to think of themselves as fair. While it is important to reflect on ways to avoid unnecessary rudeness or insensitivity, in many ways these are trick questions. If a participant says they are a fair person who doesn’t judge others on their appearance, then they are not recognising that they are implicitly biased in the way that UBT dictates. In the terms of UBT, they risk unconsciously perpetuating prejudice by refusing to acknowledge their implicit bias. On the other hand, if a participant says they are not a fair person who 
does judge others based on their appearance then they are following the model of UBT correctly, even if they have just outed themselves as an explicitly  prejudiced  person.  In  this  case,  addressing  the  participant’s  openly  expressed  bigotry  would  appear  to  be  more  important  than  interrogating his unconscious attitudes. The true role of self-reflection questions like these in UBT is to remind participants that implicit bias is omnipresent and perpetuates prejudice regardless of our consciously held intentions. Stereotypes:  UBT typically involves a discussion of what stereotypes are and how they can contribute to discrimination. UBT often positions implicit bias as a factor in creating negative stereotypes and argues that discriminatory behaviour  is  linked  to  unconscious  acceptance  of  stereotypical  beliefs.  Some UBT explains the concepts of in and out-group empathy. This is one of the less controversial areas of UBT. Belief in and explicit endorsement of racially prejudiced stereotypes are reliable indicators of racist behaviour (see here). However, as discussed here, the extent to which  this  is  a  result  of  implicit  or  unconscious  thought  is  uncertain.  Additionally,  there  is  some  evidence  that  UBT  may  reinforce  racial  stereotypes, as described here. 


==[[Microaggressions]]:==  UBT sometimes claims that implicit bias can manifest in the workplace in the form of microaggressions. 


Microaggressions have been defined as:

‘brief and commonplace daily verbal, behavioral, or environmental indignities, whether intentional or unintentional, that communicate hostile,  derogatory,  or  negative  racial  slights  and  insults  toward  people of color’.

In  the  context  of  UBT,  microaggressions  are  usually  characterised  as  unconscious behaviours that demonstrate the presence of unrecognised implicit prejudice. Examples of microaggressions range from actions widely recognised as insensitive or impolite (like demanding to know where someone is ‘really from’) to more subjective interactions that are arguably open to interpretation (like  complimenting  a  black  person  on  their  eloquence).59 This list  of  microaggressions contains examples from both extremes of the spectrum.

The degree of significance attached to microaggressions varies considerably between UBT providers and some trainings do not mention microaggressions at all. Anti-Racism Training or UBT marketed by advocates of CRT is likely to place greater ideological emphasis on microaggressions. Taking the IAT: Some UBT asks participants to sit an IAT. As we have discussed here, the IAT is poorly regarded as a psychological test. However, in UBT it is used to highlight to participants the supposed omnipresence of  implicit  bias  and  to  encourage  them  to  recognise  that  they  have  prejudices they are not consciously aware of.   Techniques  for  reducing  implicit  bias:  UBT  advises  participants  to  interrogate their intuitive assumptions for evidence of implicit bias before making  decisions.  Some  trainings  recommend  techniques  for  slowing  down your thought process to facilitate this. You can read about the validity of  implicit  bias  reduction  techniques  here.  But,  as  explained  here,  the  central technique recommended by UBT is to cultivate perpetual awareness of  your  unconscious  prejudice  by  continually  scrutinising  your  thought  process for evidence of its existence. Accepting Feedback:  Some UBT also encourages participants to call out perceived expressions of implicit bias in colleagues, which is sometimes referred to as being an ‘ethical bystander’. This is arguably given more emphasis in UBT influenced by Critical Race Theory.In this context, UBT sometimes advises participants that they must accept ‘feedback’  on  their  implicit  prejudices  entirely  uncritically.  Denying  an  
accusation of implicit bias is sometimes regarded as refusing to acknowledge your  role  in  unconsciously  perpetuating  prejudice.  If  UBT  is  heavily  influenced by the ideology of CRT, this may be combined with the view that  members  of  identity  groups  seen  as  ‘privileged’  are  not  entitled  to  question the experiences of ‘oppressed’ identity groups, or their perception of whether a particular incident was motivated by subconscious prejudice. Doing  so  may  be  labelled  ‘gaslighting’  and  identified  as  perpetuating  oppressive systems of power. Ironically, this view was epitomised by the reaction of IAT creator Mahzarin Banaji when Jesse Singal asked her about the growing evidence that the IAT  is  not  a  valid  psychological  test.  She  claimed  that  the  implicit  bias  paradigm is only criticised by: ‘a small group of aggrieved individuals who think that Black people have it easy in American society and that the IAT work might make their lives easier’.In other words, it is Banaji’s view that the concept of implicit bias is only criticised by racists.60 This kind of circular reasoning is extremely common in Anti-Racism Training and UBT informed by Critical Race Theory and is sometimes referred to as ‘Kafka trapping’. Bias spotting exercises: UBT often concludes with an exercise where participants are asked to spot implicit bias in workplace interactions. In examples such as choosing between candidates for a job or putting ideas forward  at  a  meeting,  participants  must  identify  where  implicit  bias  is  presumed to be causing discriminatory outcomes.


==Does Unconscious Bias Training reduce implicit prejudice and racial discrimination at work?==

There  is  little  evidence  suggesting  that  it  does  and,  worryingly,  some  indication  that  UBT  may  increase  division  and  hinder  effective  communication in the workplace. It is legitimate to question whether UBT represents a worthwhile investment for organisations genuinely seeking to reduce racial discrimination.  Implicit  bias  appears  to  explain  only  a  fraction  of  discriminatory  behaviour: The  most  generous  studies  find  that  implicit  bias,  as  it  is  understood  in  the  context  of  IAT  and  UBT,  accounts  for  about  4%  of  discriminatory behaviour in lab settings. Under meta-analysis this figure 
falls  to  1%.  Even  if  we  accept  that  implicit  bias  is  a  factor  in  racial  discrimination,  it  does  not  account  for  between  96-99%  of  observable  prejudice. UBT therefore appears to be an inefficient target of intervention for employers seeking to reduce racial discrimination.62  Targeting  implicit  attitudes  is  ineffective:  UBT  is  of  course  heavily  premised on the idea that reducing levels of implicit bias is a vital way for organisations  to  measurably  reduce  the  impact  of  racial  prejudice.  If  it  were true that businesses could reduce racism by employing UBT there would be a strong case for its use in the workplace. Unfortunately, ‘Robust data is lacking for many of these interventions’63 according to Fitzgerald.  The poor reliability of the IAT, explained here, makes it hard to establish if a reduction in implicit bias signifies a change in an individual’s implicit beliefs,  or  is  simply  a  reflection  of  the  test’s  poor  test-retest  reliability.  Additionally, the small number of studies demonstrating that it is possible to change levels of implicit bias show that reductions are minimal, short term and do not lead to a reduction in real-world discriminatory behaviour.64 Forscher  summarises  his  meta-analysis  of  unconscious  bias  reduction  techniques as follows: ‘Based on the evidence that is currently available I’d say that we cannot claim that implicit bias is a useful target of intervention.’  

===Racial disparities persist in companies who have invested in UBT: ===

Racial  disparities  continue  to  be  evident  in  organisations  where  UBT  has been deployed, discrediting the core claim that training in implicit bias creates diverse workplaces. Firms like Pinterest and Google have made  huge  investments  in  UBT  and  related  diversity  initiatives,  but  society  wide  patterns  of  unequal  racial  representation  continue  to  be  reflected in the makeup of their workforces.66 This may be a consequence of  the  fact  that  implicit  bias,  and  by  extension  the  UBT  that  aims  to  reduce it, is found to be such a small factor in real world discriminatory behaviour, as described here. Targeting implicit bias may distract from addressing other causes of prejudice: As pointed out by Jesse Singal, explicit racial prejudice, openly expressed  through  pejorative  racial  stereotypes,  is  often  found  in  organisations where racial discrimination is a problem. He gives the example of Ferguson police department. Following the police shooting of Michael Brown, an unarmed black man, federal investigators found that: ‘Ferguson’s harmful court and police practices are due, at least in part,  to  intentional  discrimination,  as  demonstrated  by  direct  
20evidence of racial bias and stereotyping about African Americans by certain Ferguson police and municipal court officials.’
Singal goes on to suggest that focusing on invisible, implicit prejudice as advocated by boosters of UBT may distract from frankly confronting explicitly racist behaviour. Science reporter Olivia Goldhill further theorises that blaming implicit  impulses  for  racially  prejudiced  behaviour  risks  minimising  the  responsibility of individuals to behave in ethical ways."

(https://freespeechunion.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Unconscious-Bias-Training.pdf)


=More information=

* [[Implicit Association Testing ]]

[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Race]]