
'''* Report: SUBSIDIZING UNSUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT. Undermining the Earth with public funds. By Andre de Moor and Peter Calama. Commissioned by the Earth Council.'''

URL = https://www.cbd.int/doc/case-studies/inc/cs-inc-earthcouncil-unsustainable-en.pdf

=Description=

"In principle, there can be no question that subsidies can be a useful and
beneficial means of providing incentives to meet objectives that governments
believe are economically or socially desirable. But in practice such subsidies
tend to become deeply entrenched in the expectations and interests of those
who benefit from them, long after they have served their original purposes;
there is also great resistance to any attempt to change these subsidies, even
when their costs have reached a point where they far outweigh any conceivable
benefits.

Recently it has become apparent that in many cases such incentives also
exact a high cost in environmental and social terms which undermines the
prospects for effecting the transition to sustainable development. The extent
of this is brought out persuasively in this study by Andre de Moor of the
'''Institute for Research on Public Expenditures''' commissioned by the Earth
Council with the support of the Netherlands government and the World Bank,
which is the subject of this report. Led by the distinguished Dutch Economist
and Minister, former Secretary-General of the OECD, Emile van Lennep, it
focused on four sectors : energy, road transport, water and agriculture  in
which such perverse incentives have become pervasive. It demonstrates
dramatically how in so many cases the subsidies provide disincentives to
sustainable development while denying to the poor the benefits which better
deployment of these resources could produce. At a time when new funding is
becoming more and more difficult to come by, this study makes it clear that
there is an immense potential for redeployment of existing resources to
provide positive incentives and support for sustainable development while
improving economic efficiency and competitivenes."


[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Policy]]