
=Movement=

'''= protecting and promoting critical thinking in US K12 schools'''

URL = https://undoctrinate.org/

"We are a group of committed parents, teachers, former teachers, and former students who believe in the right of all K12 students to engage in free thought and free inquiry in the classroom, and to receive an education free of bias, indoctrination, and partisanship. Our mission is to "undoctrinate" American schools, by which we mean to free them from biased teaching that amounts to an "orthodoxy" (one "correct" way for all students to think on issues open to debate.)

If you have a published story on school indoctrination to share, or if you just have a question or comment, please get in touch!"

(https://undoctrinate.org/about-us/)


=The Book=

'''* Book: Undoctrinate. How Politicized Classrooms Harm Kids and Ruin Our Schools—and What We Can Do About It. By Bonnie Kerrigan Snyder. Simon and Schuster, 2021'''

URL = https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/Undoctrinate/Bonnie-Kerrigan-Snyder/9781642939125

From the Publisher:

"Are your kids being indoctrinated in school?

Unfortunately, it’s increasingly likely. From “social justice” to critical race theory, and from advocacy and activism campaigns to planned “action weeks,” teachers and schools nationwide are abandoning neutrality in the classroom, embracing political agendas and partisan aims, and expecting students to get on board.

Meanwhile, students with doubts or misgivings decline to voice objections due to fears of lowered grades, impacted college recommendation letters, social ostracism, “cancellation,” public shaming, ridicule, and other formal and informal means of “correcting” them and making them toe the ideological line.

Is this what we want for our kids? Will this kind of “education” produce able citizens or independent thinkers capable of self-government?

The range of opinion has been narrowing in higher education for some time; now, heavy-handed thought constriction and chilled speech are choking our secondary, middle, and even elementary schools. The situation is dire—and America urgently needs a response.

This book provides the tools we need to confront and remove hidden agendas, to uproot and reject educational biases, and to restore balance and integrity to America’s classrooms."

[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:Books]]