
'''= “uneconomic growth occurs when increases in production come at an expense in resources and well-being that is worth more than the items made”.''' [https://newleftreview.org/issues/II109/articles/herman-daly-benjamin-kunkel-ecologies-of-scale]


=Description=

'''1. From the Wikipedia:'''

"Uneconomic growth, in human development theory, welfare economics (the economics of social welfare), and some forms of ecological economics, is economic growth that reflects or creates a decline in the quality of life. The concept is attributed to the economist Herman Daly, though other theorists can also be credited for the incipient idea.Note that economic degrowth is different from uneconomic growth (or uneconomic degrowth), it is meant as a reduction of the size of the economy that would bring well-being and sustainability, see http://events.it-sudparis.eu/degrowthconference/en/.

The cost, or decline in well-being, associated with extended economic growth is argued to arise as a result of "the social and environmental sacrifices made necessary by that growing encroachment on the eco-system. In other words, "[u]neconomic growth occurs when increases in production come at an expense in resources and well-being that is worth more than the items made."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uneconomic_growth)


'''2. CASSE:'''

"Long before the economy threatens the resilience
of ecosystems, economic growth can become
undesirable. Much growth (i.e., increasing GDP)
consists of “defensive expenditures,” products
and services that counteract the negative consequences
of other economic activities. An example
of a defensive expenditure is the treatment of
cancer caused by industrial pollution.
Even assuming a product causes no direct harm
to its user, its production inevitably contributes
to the depletion of natural resources. The tradeoff
between products and natural resources may
be worthwhile when the economy is small, but
as it grows, the additional products become increasingly
costly. Through much of human history
people have been made better off by having
and consuming more things. In high-consuming
countries today, however, the costs of increased
production often outweigh the benefits. Further
growth has become uneconomic."
(http://steadystate.org/wp-content/uploads/CASSE_Brief_Sustainable_Scale.pdf)

[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Post-Growth]]

[[Category:Ecology]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Business]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Post-Growth]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]