
=Source=

Article: The Unemployed Exchange Association (UXA): Nineteen Thirties’ Grassroots Economic Development, an Introduction to John Curl's Living in the U.X.A. By Bernard Marszalek, January, 2009

=Description=

Bernard Marszalek:

"In times of economic collapse, like often during natural
disasters, protective shells are discarded and solidarity
emerges and social creativity erupts. No money, barter.
No food, grow it and share it. Need help, people
pitch-in. Most recently in Argentina, during their
economic collapse in 2002, neighbors in Buenos Aires
held daily outdoor meetings to discuss how best to
survive and teams were established to look after the
needs of the local people.

Closer to home, throughout California during the
Depression, unemployed workers formed associations to
bring food from farms, repair housing, and create a
modest economy based on labor exchanges, not money.

Thousands of Californians spontaneously established
these democratic associations. There were so many of
them that they began to form networks of convenience
to lay a deep foundation of survival. They were creating
out of devastation a new society based on social needs
not individual profit, self-help not charity.

The short history of the local Unemployed Exchange
Association (UXA), written 25 years ago by John Curl (
author of the forthcoming “For All The People:
Uncovering the Hidden History of Cooperation,
Cooperative Movements, and Communalism In
America,” ) provides a snapshot of this grassroots
economic revival by focusing on the form it took, over
75 years ago, in the neighborhoods of Oakland.
He recounts how desperate people, many unemployed
for several years, found the means to recreate
livelihoods without money, but with the better currency
of cooperation. These people took what had become
valueless in monetary terms and transformed it into
common wealth. As if moving from one dimension to
another, things found social uses where before they had
been junk.

The old economy of the market, private ownership and
individual pursuit melted away to reveal a previously
under-utilized treasury of human creativity and a
capacity to recreate, through solidarity, an economy
based on needs.

The UXA story may read like a utopian tale only
because the history of mutual aid, of self-help ventures,
is largely untold. And yet the rhizomes of cooperative,
grassroots endeavors reaches forward to The
Intercollective, the cooperative economy of the 70’s and
80’s in the SF Bay area, that John mentions at the end of
this essay.

And from there the influence reaches to the present
where we have in the SF Bay area not only the largest
concentration of worker cooperatives in the country, but
also a fast growing network of alternative economic
ventures of all sorts. From urban agriculture to
eco-friendly transportation, from land trusts to locally
controlled alternative energy start-ups, a new society is
taking root. And none too soon.

This vast diversity of mainly volunteer-run projects has
the dynamic to demonstrate another way of living – an
infrastructure of a new society. They are the stepping
stones from a waste-filled, stressful and joyless present
to a future where abundance is defined by more than
material possessions. Faint glimpses of that richer
society appear while reading John Curl’s “Living In the
UXA”."



=Discussion=

Jonathan Rowe:

"Groups like it ultimately involved more than 1.3 million people, in more than 30 states. It happened spontaneously, without experts or blueprints. Most of the participants were blue collar workers whose formal schooling had stopped at high school. Some groups evolved a kind of money to create more flexibility in exchange. An example was the [[Unemployed Exchange Association]], or UXA, based in Oakland, California. (The UXA story was told in an excellent article in the weekly East Bay Express in 1983, on which the following paragraphs are based.) UXA began in a Hooverville (an encampment of the poor during the Depression, so-called after the president) called “Pipe City,” near the East Bay waterfront. Hundreds of homeless people were living there in sections of large sewer pipe that were never laid because the city ran out of money. Among them was Carl Rhodehamel, a musician and engineer.

Rhodehamel and others started going door to door in Oakland, offering to do home repairs in exchange for unwanted items. They repaired these and circulated them among themselves. Soon they established a commissary and sent scouts around the city and intothe surrounding farms to see what they could scavenge or exchange labor for. Within six months they had 1,500 members, and a thriving sub-economy that included a foundry and machine shop, woodshop, garage,soap factory, print shop, wood lot, ranches, and lumber mills. They rebuilt 18 trucks from scrap. At UXA’s peak it distributed 40 tons of food a week.

It all worked on a time-credit system. Each hour worked earned a hundred points; there was no hierarchy of skills, and all work paid the same. Members could use credits to buy food and other items at the commissary, medical and dental services, haircuts, andmore. A council of some 45 coordinators met regularly to solve problems and discuss opportunities.

One coordinator might report that a saw needed a new motor. Another knew of a motor but the owner  wanted a piano in return. A third member knew of a piano that was available. And on and on. It was an amalgam of enterprise and cooperation—the flexibility and hustle of the market, but without the encoded greed of the corporation or the stifling bureaucracy of the state. The economics texts don’t really have a name for it. The members called it a “reciprocal economy.”


It would seem that a movement that provided livelihood for more than 300,000 people in California alone would merit discussion in the history books. Amidst the floundering of the early 1930s, this was something that actually worked. Yet in most accounts the self-help co-ops get barely a line.

The one exception is Upton Sinclair’s campaign for governor in 1934. Sinclair was a kind of Ralph Nader of his day. He based his campaign on a plan he called End Poverty in California, or EPIC, which was based in turn on the self-help cooperatives, UXA in particular. It would have taken the state’s idle farmland and factories and turned them into worker co-ops.

The idea of a genuine economy shorn of Wall Street contrivance touched a chord. Some 2,000 EPIC clubs sprang up. Sinclair won the Democratic primary, but California’s moneyed establishment mustered $10 million dollars to pummel him. EPIC died with his campaign, and the idea has been associated with quixotic politics ever since.

To say UXA and the other cooperative economies faced challenges is to put it mildly. They were going against the grain of an entire culture. Anti-communist “Red Squads” harassed them, while radicals complained they were too practical and not sufficiently committed to systemic change.

But the main thing that killed the co-ops was the Works Progress Administration and its cash jobs. Those WPA jobs were desperately needed. But someof them were make-work, while the co-op work was genuinely productive.

The co-ops pleaded with FDR’s Administration to include them in the WPA. Local governments were helping with gasoline and oil. But the New Dealers weren’t interested, and the co-ops melted away. For years they were period pieces, like soup lines and Okies."
(http://jonathanrowe.org/money-cooperative-economy-in-the-great-depression)


=More Information=

* [[Unemployed Cooperative Relief Organization]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Sharing]]