=Principles=

Diane Musho Hamilton:

"Below is a list of what “unhealthy inclusion” looks like, which calls for a new approach to inclusion, equality, diversity and social justice.

* Oppressive rules around speech and “political correctness”. – – There can seem to be a hypersensitivity to language and behavior that can create a culture of fear.

* Endless processes of blame and accusation that don’t seem to ever resolve.

* A victim-oppressor framework that doesn’t allow any other narratives to come forth.

* The inversion of power hierarchies instead of their transformation (with a new group of oppressors at the top instead of no oppressors there).

* Devaluing of assertiveness and aggressiveness that can breed innovation, both inside a team and with competitors.

* Creating a talent drain as some leave rather than speak out.

* A monoculture that only values a narrow range of attitudes, politics, personality types, and communication styles.

* The demonization of those with differing views.

* A focus on internal politics and policies which draws too much attention away from action and movement forward."

(https://tendirections.com/inclusion-2-0/)

=Source=

"This is an online “Inclusion 2.0” program developed by a conflict mediator and Zen teacher, Diane Musho Hamilton in collaboration with teachers, mediators, and organizational theorists."
(https://tendirections.com/inclusion-2-0/)

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:Identity_Politics]]
[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:Relational]]