'''= A Platform for “Collaborative Living”'''

URL = https://www.uniiverse.com/

=Discussion=

Antonin Leonard et al:

"When asked how Uniiverse started in June 2011 (he and his co-founder Craig Follett were still BCG consultants at that time), Ben says: "We wanted to help people reconnect in real-life and share their passions. As a spearfisher and underwater-hockey player, I found it difficult to meet like-minded people to share my passions with. We also identified a white space in the market: No platform really allowed people to build the trust required for offline interactions.”

The idea of using online platforms to help like-minded people re-connect offline is not new, especially among sharing platforms such as Vayable, SkillShare, and TaskRabbit. But, while these focus on a specific segment such as experiences, time, or errands, Uniiverse aims to offer a universal platform for everything collaborative: “Let’s say Paul registers for a snowboarding competition on Uniiverse, then he might find a rideshare to get there, and a place to stay nearby, while finding somebody to sit his dog during the weekend.”


'''Trust Building Across Verticals'''

Uniiverse allows users to offer any real-life services or activities. This transversal approach aims to bring a solution to the “trust dilution” users face when using distinct sharing services: In addition to trust gained from social networks (i.e. mutual Facebook friends, for instance), users can build up trust from ratings and reviews on a wide range of activities and services: “If Laura gets positive reviews for a crash course on photography she hosted, other users might be more comfortable in engaging with her on more sensitive activities, like babysitting or borrowing a car.”

Recently, other attempts to tackle the trust issue include the new startup TrustCloud, which allows users to consolidate trust points and badges from various sharing and social media platforms.


'''Understanding People’s Aspirations'''

There are three main drivers for activating “the sharing switch” in people’s minds: saving or making money, sustainability concerns, and meeting new people. Though financial drivers clearly are the most prominent in these troubled economic times, Ben hopes the social driver will be, in time, the main reason people join the site: “We saw several campaigns putting the accent on financial savings to promote sharing platforms. Though Uniiverse allows anyone to become an entrepreneur, ultimately we believe the true driver for sharing offline will be the social bond, not money. This is why we allow people to offer both free and paid activities.”

Uniiverse has currently secured $750,000 in funding to cover development costs, as well as marketing, public relations, and an upcoming ambassador program. The team is composed of 10 people, as of now, and is planning to raise new money quickly. Its current business model relies on transaction fees (none are taken on free services), but Ben foresees alternative revenues for the future: “We have other revenue models in mind, but our focus, at this point, is on building a great product together with a community of people who love the service.”

In terms of competition, the main player out there is probably Craigslist, especially because of its scale. Ben does not consider other experience and service marketplaces (such as Vayable, TaskRabbit, or Gidsy) as direct competitors because of their focused approach. Time will tell if Uniiverse’s universal platform for all activities and services is a winning strategy."
(http://www.shareable.net/blog/four-insights-from-uniiverse-on-the-future-of-sharing)


=Interview=

Conducted via Erik Kain:

"How '''is Uniiverse unlike traditional social networks? Do you see this as the future of social media rather than something like Facebook, or is it more complimentary?'''

Uniiverse is not a social network. Traditional social networks are about content sharing of user generated content (photos, status updates, stories, etc) across the connections between people. Uniiverse is about a different kind of user generated content — instead of photos and status updates, Uniiverse is a marketplace. It is about user generated experiences.

Uniiverse connects with existing social networks to help facilitate interactions and transactions. Uniiverse builds on top of the existing social graph, acting as an app that adds value in several ways, enabling:

- trust between users – showing social proximity (e.g. mutual friends, previous interactions), ratings, reviews, and participation across multiple categories and verticals),

- the ability to discover and create new experiences – it’s all about curation, but this form of user generated content is much more meaningful because it’s real life experiences that we’re talking about

- safe and secure online payments – i.e., we enable anyone to become an entrepreneur – we’re an online storefront for people looking to share their time, interests, belongings, space, and skills

The social layer has been built and we are complimentary to this. The next decade is about the engagement layer, and we are building the trust and engagement layer that connects people for real life interactions.



'''What makes Uniiverse different from other sites like MeetUp?'''

Uniiverse is differentiated based on the breadth (i.e. usefulness across categories), depth (i.e. calendar functionality, trust metrics, payment engine), and vision.

Breadth: Uniiverse reaches across a vast array of service and activity categories. This enables not only a common user experience, but also trust across verticals. e.g. if someone is looking to rent your drill, you can get a sense of who they are by seeing that they’ve hosted cooking classes with great reviews, and that they go running with one of your friends

Depth: Unlike sites like MeetUp, our calendar functionality allows people to post availabilities in a very flexible manner. e.g. A personal trainer can say that they are available for evenings and weekends, and people can book them for a certain length of time. But someone can also hold an event such as a cooking class, that is specifically two hours long on a Thursday night.

Users can also specify the minimum number of people for an event to happen, and the event will only occur after that threshold has been reached. e.g. you need at least 3 people to play a particular board game (our favorite: Settlers of Catan).

Moreover, Uniiverse enables payments and is focused on the supply side (hosts and creators of listings). Many other sites, such as MeetUp, charge for the host to participate. On Uniiverse, it’s totally free for hosts to post, and Uniiverse acts as a payment engine. And if a host of a kayaking event decides to charge $25 per ticket, they will get $25 for each person who joins. $100 will be deposited into their account for the four people who join. Uniiverse charges a small service fee to the buyer to cover credit card processing costs, and make a margin that helps support the viability of the service we provide.

Uniiverse also allows people to offer and share services (unlike MeetUp). We believe services such as items, space and skills are the enablers of many of activities. For example, a user who is planning to attend a snowboard competition (activity) might find a rideshare/carpool (service) to go to the competition and find a place to stay with a local (service) for their friends.

Vision: Uniiverse is enabling the sharing economy, globally. Uniiverse brings economic, societal/cultural and environmental benefits — would be happy to talk about these in more detail. People are extremely passionate about Uniiverse: despite the fact that we’ve just started, we have over 50 volunteer interns across cities in North America because of our vision and peoples’ passion.

From a strategic standpoint, we’re aiming to unify the currently fragmented sharing economy — e.g. Airbnb, Skillshare, Zimrides, etc. The value in the sharing economy is not fully tapped because there’s no transport of trust across verticals and categories.

Uniiverse is resurrecting old marketplace behaviors, such as sharing, on a scale that was never before possible."
(http://www.forbes.com/sites/erikkain/2012/04/17/how-a-canadian-internet-start-up-plans-to-get-you-offline-and-into-the-sharing-economy/3/)


[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]