
=Directory=

For the links, see the original page at http://faircrowd.work/unions-for-crowdworkers/

Maintained by [[Fair Crowd Work]] and  Six Silberman:

==In the United Kingdom:==

"The London-based Couriers and Logistics Branch of the Independent Workers of Great Britain is doing pioneering work defending the rights of workers in the British courier and logistics industry, including self-employed workers for major courier companies and food delivery companies such as Deliveroo and UberEats. About page. Join page.

IWW Leeds is raising funds to support 7 Deliveroo couriers who were punished or fired for organizing for better pay and more favorable contracts.


==In Sweden:==

Unionen has developed a plan to certify platforms for fair and socially sustainable working conditions.


==In Austria:==

The ÖGB supports the interests of crowdworkers. For Support, please contact crowdwork@oegb.at

The Austrian Chamber of Labor (Arbeiterkammer) ist doing pioneering work researching the working conditions of crowdworkers. For questions you can contact: Sylvia.kuba@akwien.at


==In Germany:==

ver.di has over a decade of experience supporting and representing the interests of self-employed persons, especially journalists.

IG Metall is open to self-employed members since January 1, 2016, with a focus on crowd- and platform-based workers. As of April 2017, self-employed members of IG Metall may receive insurance for legal costs up to EUR 100,000 in cases of legal disputes with clients. Join form.


==In the United States:==

The Teamsters 117 in Seattle and the New York Taxi Workers Alliance are doing pioneering work defending the rights of drivers working for Uber, Lyft, and other “transportation network companies.”

The Freelancers Union offers unique services for freelancers, including insurance and training, and worked with the City Council of New York to pass the landmark “Freelance Isn’t Free” Act, defending the rights of freelancers to ensure they get paid, in 2016."

(http://faircrowd.work/unions-for-crowdworkers/)

=More information=

*  "To suggest information for [http://faircrowd.work/unions-for-crowdworkers/ this page], please email Six Silberman at michael.silberman@igmetall.de.

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]