

=Description=

A concept of Immanuel Kant, explained by Keith Hart:

"Shortly before, Kant wrote Perpetual
peace: a philosophical sketch. The last
quarter of the 18th century saw its
own share of ‘globalisation’ – the
American and French revolutions, the
rise of British industry and the
international movement to abolish
slavery. Kant knew that coalitions of
states were gearing up for war, yet he
responded to this sense of the world
coming closer together by proposing
how humanity might form society as
world citizens beyond the boundaries
of states. He held that ‘cosmopolitan
right’, the basic right of all world
citizens, should rest on conditions of
universal hospitality, that is, on the
right of a stranger not to be treated
with hostility when he arrives on
someone else’s territory. In other
words, we should be free to go
wherever we like in the world, since it
belongs to all of us equally. He goes
on to say:

The peoples of the earth have entered
in varying degree into a universal
community, and it has developed to
the point where a violation of rights
in one part of the world is felt
everywhere. The idea of a
cosmopolitan right is not fantastic
and overstrained; it is a necessary
complement to the unwritten code of
political and international right,
transforming it into a universal right
of humanity.

This confident sense of an emergent
world order, written over 200 years
ago, can now be seen as the high
point of the liberal revolution, before
it was overwhelmed by its twin
offspring, industrial capitalism and
the nation-state.


Earlier Kant wrote an essay, ‘Idea for a
universal history with a cosmopolitan
purpose’ which included the following
propositions:

1. In man (as the only rational creature
on earth) those natural faculties which
aim at the use of reason shall be fully
developed in the species, not in the
individual.

2. The means that nature employs to
accomplish the development of all
faculties is the antagonism of men in
society, since this antagonism becomes,
in the end, the cause of a lawful order
of this society.

3. The latest problem for mankind, the
solution of which nature forces us to
seek, is the achievement of a civil
society which is capable of
administering law universally.

4. This problem is both the most
difficult and the last to be solved by
mankind.

5. A philosophical attempt to write a
universal world history according to a
plan of nature which aims at perfect
civic association of mankind must be
considered to be possible and even as
capable of furthering nature’s purpose."
(http://www.radicalanthropologygroup.org/new/Journal_files/journal_02.pdf)


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]