

=Description=

Laura van der Vlies:

"This is a social movement about action and creative labour. Joan talks about different seminars they have already organised, or are organising in the coming months. The movement focuses on militant research. The main goal with this is not to create an object of study, but to situate knowledge. There is a transformation going on in the world. During the 50’s and 60’s it was quite clear how labour was organized. People were working in a factory and it was possible to do militant research in that factory. It was easy to ask the workers which conditions of exploitation they suffered. Any kind of claim was used to extract information and to organize the workers.

But these days, the way of production has changed. Production is happening all over the city, so militant research is everywhere, but at the same time nowhere. It is also often not accepted to ask people about their working conditions. For Universidad Nomada, the starting point of research are now social centres, or at least organized places, to do the militant research. It is important to start from an organized or collective ‘thing’ or centre, because precarity is important. It is not about economic claims, but about culture. It is easier to find answers against precarity in an organized context than in a work sector.

One of the things Universidad Nomada is working on is helping people that have problems with housing, labour and undocumented migrants. People can get free consultancy at their organisation.

The next thing Universidad Nomada is going to organize is a set of conferences about the crisis. This will allow them to put out messages that will circulate on a higher level. They have several institutions that would like to join, like the Social Centre in Madrid. There will be a new form of corporation between social institutions that will give other ways of empowering. The crisis-context allows to also combine the social map of things."
(http://networkcultures.org/wpmu/wintercamp/2009/03/05/creative-labour-two-presentations/)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Education]]