=Description=


==A discussion on the etymology==

Mixel Kiemen:

"To understand the tipping point, let me consider the etymology of both university and interversity. The university was about “the whole” (from the Latin “uni-versitas”), indicating that universities were the place for universal knowledge. Due to the information overload and the acceleration of innovation, the concept of universal knowledge is becoming impossible. Even the largest universities today have specialized research performed by specialized research institutes. Indeed the university is getting distributed and is dissolving in a larger social fabric by Public-Private Partnership (PPP). Universities are following a trend similar to our data-storage: from mainframes to distributed servers, creating the internet.

To honor this parent of dissolving into a web, the prefix “uni-” get replaced by “inter-”. The [[Interversity]] draws attention to “what is between us” (from the Latin Inter, like used in the Internet, interacting, interchange, interdependent, interbreed, etc.)."

(https://mixelkiemen.medium.com/the-4th-generation-of-university-is-the-first-of-three-generations-inteversity-5cc459dc3936)

=History=

via Mixel Kiemen:

"The 1st generation university is a scholar institute of knowledge. The oldest still active university is Bologna and it goes back to 1088. The 2nd generation university can be aligned with the scientific revolution, when research became a systematic part of the university. For a time indication, the first scientific journals date back to 1665. First only few such journals exist, today and an abundance of them exists. The 3rd generation is driven by a search for technological innovation, boosting the economy by developing a 3rd university pillar: Technology Transfer Office (TTO). It took centuries to institutionalize science in university, it is only taking decades to institutionalize TTO."

(https://mixelkiemen.medium.com/the-4th-generation-of-university-is-the-first-of-three-generations-inteversity-5cc459dc3936)


==The [[Role of Technology Transfer Offices in the Emergence of a Fourth Generation University]]==

Mixel Kiemen:

"The 3rd generation is driven by a search for technological innovation, boosting the economy by developing a 3rd university pillar: Technology Transfer Office (TTO). It took centuries to institutionalize science in university, it is only taking decades to institutionalize TTO.

+ First generation TTO date back to the 1970s and existed as business ventures outside the university. 

* The 2nd generation TTO arose during the 1990s as incubation centers containing spinoffs (Debackere 2005). 

* The 3th generation TTO is an ongoing process and showing some interesting challenges. The focus relates to open innovation, but a paradox arises with the classic value of TTO focused on Intellectual Property. 

* Something new is happening as the tipping point is reached. Maarten Steinbuch (2016) called it the 4th generation university." 

((https://mixelkiemen.medium.com/the-4th-generation-of-university-is-the-first-of-three-generations-inteversity-5cc459dc3936))

[[Category:Education]]