
'''* Essay: Reconsidering the Bayh-Dole Act and the Current University Invention Ownership Model. By Martin Kenney and Donald Patton.'''

URL  = http://brie.berkeley.edu/publications/WP182.pdf


=Abstract=

"The current model within which universities own the inventions made by their researchers
was enshrined in the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980. This paper finds that the current system, in
which universities maintain de jure ownership of inventions, is not optimal either in terms
of economic efficiency or in advancing the social interest of rapidly commercializing
technology and encouraging entrepreneurship. We demonstrate that this model is plagued
by ineffective incentives, information asymmetries, and contradictory motivations for the
university, the inventors, potential licensees, and university technology licensing offices
(TLOs). We suggest that these structural uncertainties lead to delays in licensing,
misaligned incentives among parties, and delays in the flow of scientific information and
the materials necessary for scientific progress. The institutional arrangements within
which TLOs are embedded have encouraged some of them to become revenue
maximizers.

We suggest two invention ownership models as superior alternatives to the conventional
model. The first alternative is to vest ownership with the inventor, who could choose the
commercialization path for the invention. For this privilege the inventor would provide
the university 5 percent ownership stake in any returns to the invention. The inventor
would be free to contract with the university TLO or any other entity that might assist in
commercialization. The second alternative discussed is to make all inventions
immediately publicly available through an open source strategy or, through a requirement
that all inventions be licensed non-exclusively. Both alternatives would address the
current dysfunctional arrangements in licensing university technology ."


[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Research]]