
'''= also referred to as Universal Ownership'''

=Description=

"Large institutional investors are,
in effect, “Universal Owners”, as
they often have highly-diversified
and long-term portfolios that are
representative of global capital
markets. Their portfolios are inevitably
exposed to growing and widespread
costs from environmental damage
caused by companies. They can
positively influence the way business
is conducted in order to reduce
externalities and minimise their
overall exposure to these costs.
Long-term economic wellbeing
and the interests of beneficiaries
are at stake. Institutional investors
can, and should, act collectively
to reduce financial risk from
environmental impacts."
(https://www.unepfi.org/fileadmin/documents/universal_ownership.pdf)

=More information=

'''* Report: Universal Ownership. [[Why Environmental Externalities Matter To Institutional Investors]]. UNEP Finance Initiative / PRI,''' 

URL = https://www.unepfi.org/fileadmin/documents/universal_ownership.pdf

"The PRI and UNEP FI commissioned
Trucost to calculate the cost of global
environmental damage and examine
why this is important to the economy,
capital markets, companies and
institutional investors.
This study assesses the financial implications of
unsustainable natural resource use and pollution
by business. Trucost calculated the cost of global
environmental damage for seven major environmental
impacts. As environmental damage can be quantified in
monetary terms it can be integrated into financial analysis. "

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Ecology]]