

=Citation=

From the Cathechism of the Catholic Church:

"I. THE UNIVERSAL DESTINATION AND THE PRIVATE OWNERSHIP OF GOODS

2402 In the beginning God entrusted the earth and its resources to the common stewardship of mankind to take care of them, master them by labor, and enjoy their fruits.187 The goods of creation are destined for the whole human race. However, the earth is divided up among men to assure the security of their lives, endangered by poverty and threatened by violence. The appropriation of property is legitimate for guaranteeing the freedom and dignity of persons and for helping each of them to meet his basic needs and the needs of those in his charge. It should allow for a natural solidarity to develop between men.

2403 The right to private property, acquired or received in a just way, does not do away with the original gift of the earth to the whole of mankind. The universal destination of goods remains primordial, even if the promotion of the common good requires respect for the right to private property and its exercise.

2404 "In his use of things man should regard the external goods he legitimately owns not merely as exclusive to himself but common to others also, in the sense that they can benefit others as well as himself."188 The ownership of any property makes its holder a steward of Providence, with the task of making it fruitful and communicating its benefits to others, first of all his family.

2405 Goods of production - material or immaterial - such as land, factories, practical or artistic skills, oblige their possessors to employ them in ways that will benefit the greatest number. Those who hold goods for use and consumption should use them with moderation, reserving the better part for guests, for the sick and the poor.

2406 Political authority has the right and duty to regulate the legitimate exercise of the right to ownership for the sake of the common good"
(http://www.vatican.va/archive/ccc_css/archive/catechism/p3s2c2a7.htm)

=Source=

* Catechism of the Catholic Church. PART THREE. LIFE IN CHRIST. SECTION TWO. THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. CHAPTER TWO. "YOU SHALL LOVE YOUR NEIGHBOR AS YOURSELF". ARTICLE 7. THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT.

URL = http://www.vatican.va/archive/ccc_css/archive/catechism/p3s2c2a7.htm


[[Category:Peerproperty]]