
=Description=

by Vincent Munene:

"Universal Basic Income (UBI) are tokens used to reward users of the Proof of Humanity (PoH) project. PoH ensures users on the internet are real humans and not bots.

The PoH system uses social verification that includes video submission, in order to create a Sybil-proof list of humans. The system comes in handy when developers want to prevent sybil attacks on their protocols.

Most blockchains use different methods to mitigate Sybil attacks including, Proof of Work, Proof of Stake and Delegated Proof of Stake. These methods make it almost impossible for an attacker to successfully carry out a Sybil attack.

Universal Basic Income (UBI) was the first applications that was built on the Proof of Humanity (PoH) registry. The program delivers a periodic payment to individuals of a given population with no strings attached.

UBI tokens stream directly to an Ethereum address that belongs to a verified human under the PoH registry. The tokens are tradeable in all open markets and will provide access to liquidity that serves to inhibit financial coercion of public decisions.

Acquiring UBI Tokens: Once you register as a human on the PoH registry, you can start acquiring UBI. When applying for a profile, users need to submit a name, short description, a photo and a short video to verify that you are indeed human. PoH further requires new users to have a someone vouch for them in the registry."

(https://www.blockzeit.com/proof-of-humanity-and-the-universal-basic-income-ubi-token/)

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]