By [[Nathan Cravens]]

To found an economy of non-commercial activity and ensure crucial areas are identified, a code of ethics can help preserve integrity, prevent commercialization, and provide raw materials, transport, products and services for free.


1. All data must be shared freely. Revisions of or additions to previous data must be shared. Licenses can be used to legally protect the sharing of information, including the other points to follow. Patent reform must be made to prevent licensed items from becoming patented.<br>
2. Establish a user interface with social network capabilities extended not only to individuals, but organizations, spaces, and objects, including raw materials. It is here users can find items on offer, observe the needs of ongoing or potential start-up projects, observe logistics and manufacturing processes in real time. Place meticulous descriptions and animations of instructions on how to produce at home or at the local workshop or the details of mass production elsewhere with reasonings given for mass versus local production.<br>
3. Gift land or space as a commons for agriculture, industry, and service.<br>
4. Make materials, tools, and robotics a commons. <br>
5. Establish a utility commons for free power, water, and communications.<br>
6. Ensure transportation vehicles and pathways are free using electric vehicles powered by renewable sources.<br>
7. People willingly donate time and effort and provide free services or produce free goods. Mundane or tedious jobs are automated.<br>
8. Once objectives 1-7 are met, all products and services are enabled for free distribution.<br>


To adequately argue for a universal zero price outcome, one must prove: labor must require zero time or voluntary, or demographic demand must be fully met without labor. Governmental manipulation of markets such as taxation, price fixing, subsidies, and other factors like exchange rates, interest, competition vs. monopolization and so on complicate matters. By no means a complete outline, here is a simple example to begin formulating market creation and the elements identified to remove it:
<center>
"L" or able labor, multiplied by, "T" or time, multiplied by, "D" or demographic demand, minus, "P" or production technique, equals, "M" or labor/market exchange value<br>
or<br>
(L · T · D) - P = M
</center>

=Founded On=
A [[Public Resource Network]]