

=Discussion=

by Onan Musoy:

"The Unoccupy Movement is a response, quite for the expression of dissatisfaction with the system, yet essentially against the word choice, “occupy.” The Indigenous peoples of North America, while in full support of a truly egalitarian society -- as they have naturally lived this way -- balk at the choice of the word, occupy, for its historical connotations. The original inhabitants have suffered for more than five centuries in their homeland while under occupation by European settlers. If we are to have an egalitarian society among all human beings, then the First Peoples must be an equal part of the movement.

The irony of a human movement springing forth in Egypt, a cradle of western civilization, is not lost on some observers. A greater irony is that the first impulse for greater freedom emanated from the northern part of a continent in which inhabitants, four centuries ago, were sold in slavery; they endured bondage for over half their history in a new world before being freed and begrudgingly granted, in theory, equal status. If we are to have an egalitarian society among all human beings, then nonwhite non-Europeans must be an equal part of the movement.

Equally ironic is the movement’s growth and continuance in the cradle of democracy, Greece, in a part of the world where patriarchy came to power, four to five millenniums ago, and Women, half the population, became subjugated by an elitist system, including the so-called democracy of ancient Greece. If we are to have an egalitarian society among all human beings, then Women must be an equal part of the movement.

It would be remiss to neglect the most recent subgroup of Homo sapiens pressing for equal rights — the gay (more properly identified as the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) community, who have suffered under patriarchy as long as women have. If we are to have an egalitarian society among all human beings, then the LGBT community must be an equal part of the movement.

As we all recognize each other as true equals, there are paradigms with which we must keep our consciousness unoccupied. Foremost, the illusion foisted upon us throughout recorded history that there is an elite subgroup, due to whatever circumstances, who have the right to decide and rule over the fate of our species, other species dependent on our stewardship, and the viability of the planet itself."
(http://axisoflogic.com/artman/publish/Article_64269.shtml)


[[Category:OccupyWallStreet]]

[[Category:Movements]]