URL = http://webcast.oii.ox.ac.uk/?view=Webcast&ID=20070815_207


=Description=

"Cities are exciting. Cities are buzzing. They are alive with movement. A rapid flow of exchange is facilitated by a meshwork of infrastructure connections: road systems, building complexes, information and communication technology and people networks. In this environment, the Internet has advanced to become the prime communication medium that connects many threads across the fabric of urban life.

The increasing ubiquity of Internet services and applications has led many scholars to question the dichotomy between cyberspace and real space. New media and information and communication technology afford an increasingly seamless transition between mediated and unmediated forms of interaction. Driven by curiosity, initiative and interdisciplinary exchange, 'urban informatics' is an emerging cluster of people interested in research and development at the intersection of people, place and technology with a focus on cities, locative media and mobile technology."
(http://webcast.oii.ox.ac.uk/?view=Webcast&ID=20070815_207)

=About the speaker:=

"Dr Marcus Foth is a Senior Research Fellow with the Institute for Creative Industries and Innovation at Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, Australia. Employing human-centered and participatory design methods, his research pioneers new development approaches towards interactive social networking systems informed by community, social, and urban studies. Dr Foth has published over thirty articles in journals, edited books, and conference proceedings in the last three years, and is currently editing a book on Urban Informatics to be published by IGI Global in 2008."
(http://webcast.oii.ox.ac.uk/?view=Webcast&ID=20070815_207)


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Technology]]