
'''= article series, as well as podcast series and documentary by Shareable magazine, called The Response'''

URL = https://www.shareable.net/remarkable-communities-that-create-systems-change-after-disaster/

=Description=

Tom Llewellyn:

"Personal and collective transformation often occurs as a result of shared experience from tragic events. The comradery among survivors is almost impossible to replicate under ordinary circumstances. But we can learn from the response to these events and apply these lessons to the way we structure our societies.

With this in mind, Shareable is launching '''our next series to explore urban resilience initiatives and community-led disaster response and recovery efforts from around the world''' and in Northern California, where we are based. 


Together we’ll ask some often uncomfortable questions about how to: 

* Take care of each other’s needs in the aftermath of disasters through solidarity and mutual aid.
* Balance the need to get back to “normal” as quickly as possible with the need to rebuild in a more just and equitable way and create greater resilience and sustainability for all.
* Push back against “disaster capitalists” (those who seek to profit through rebuilding/recovery efforts).
* Cultivate increased resilience in our communities before disasters occur.
* Design our response and recovery practices so that impacted communities are able to move forward with a renewed sense of community cohesion and a sense of place.


Over the course of this series, we’ll share our newest guide to creating a “resilience hub” in your community (and offer support to start projects big and small). We’ll examine one of the leading methods for healing acute and chronic traumas. We will revisit the experiences of the undocumented community in the aftermath of the Tubbs Fire. And we’ll learn about initiatives taking a community wealth building approach to creating resilience through the development of green infrastructure.

Next month, we’ll release the second season of our podcast series, The Response, which will re-examine under-reported stories: 

* The 2017 earthquake in Mexico City,
* Japan’s 2011 earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear meltdown in Fukushima Prefecture, 
* The 2017 Grenfell Tower fire in London, which was the most deadly domestic blaze the city had experienced since World War II.


Finally, on July 24, we’ll premier our first documentary film, “The Response: How Puerto Ricans Are Restoring Power to the People,” featuring on-the-ground efforts in communities across the island in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria, on a big outdoor screen across from Oakland City Hall."
(https://www.shareable.net/remarkable-communities-that-create-systems-change-after-disaster/)

[[Category:P2P Solidarity]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]