'''* Article: jason f. mclennan. The Urban Agriculture Revolution. Bringing Food into Living Cities.'''

URL = http://www.urbanfarmhub.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/12/urban-agriculture-revolution.pdf [http://www.jasonmclennan.com/write/articles.html]

An important and sensible overview of why this is happening.

=Excerpts=

==Intro==

"For thousands of
years the relationship between
community and agriculture was simple.
Wherever you had human settlement – in great
numbers that is, you found agriculture. Beyond
those that moved to their food source (migratory hunter
gatherers) – humanity had to live close to their cultivation.
The distances between city and country – between fields and
farms and tenements and factories was related directly to the
rapidity of our transportation systems – after all food spoils. So it
is has only been very recent in human history – less than 200 years
for the more industrialized societies – and really only in the last 80-
100 years for the majority of humanity, that our food sources could
be completely separated from the civic and cultural life of people.
Imagine that? For thousands of years our food – domesticated
animals, vegetables, fruit, fish was interwoven into the
constant fabric of humanity –being a central determinant of
our regional personalities, our taboo’s, stories, rituals
and beliefs – not to mention serving as our most
constant and powerful reminder of our place
in creation and our role in caring for
the lands that fed us.

And then suddenly, over the course of just a few
generations, timed with the rise of the steam train, the
internal combustion engine and then the jet engine (in
concert with refrigeration), we began to quickly separate
ourselves from all manner of food production. Each decade
over the last two hundred years has seen significantly
fewer people (as an overall percentage) responsible for
feeding the rest of us as the urban/rural divide grows.
A great disconnect now exists between what it takes to
sustain ourselves and what the environment can safely
and sustainably produce. Left in the unfortunate position
to suddenly provide for oneself, most global citizens –
and certainly the majority of Americans and Canadians
would quickly starve. The cultural knowledge of how to
sustain our life as a species has been outsourced. Food
is global – grown often by faceless and nameless people
and corporations from somewhere else. As a result, food
has changed from the very basis and fabric of society
to merely something we merely eat. Beef and chicken
simply something that we buy at the grocery store. Fish
something that comes deep-fried in the shape of a stick. A
farmer- a quaint and somewhat embarrassing occupation
for those that don’t have other options.

In short we have engaged in a rapid social, cultural and
ecological experiment that we now know is responsible
for a significant portion of our global environmental and
social problems.

For most of humanity, food – real food – has slipped from
our grasp, falling into the clutches of industrial systems
that create geographic, physical and emotional barriers
between us and what we eat. Most food is grown and/
or packaged so far from where it is eventually consumed
that people have very little connection to the process
of food production. The effects of such a disconnect
damage our species just as profoundly as they damage the
environment. As we reexamine how we build our cities
and neighborhoods of the future – to be ‘living cities filled
with living buildings, sites and infrastructure’ it is critical
that we simultaneously address the question of how and
where we grow food and reconnect civilization with the
very thing that started it – agriculture.

We need to return food and the art of farming to where
they belong: our own backyards, neighborhoods and
communities, whether we live in a megacity or a small town.
By doing so, we will rejuvenate our relationship with what
we put in our bodies while reconnecting us mentally and
spiritually with this wonderful world that sustains us."


==Conclusion==

"When the price of energy and water reach a certain
threshold, the cost of shipping food and ingredients around
the world will become prohibitive. We will then see a
market contraction at that point, and regional food will reemerge
on its own. Its simple economics. Left to the path
we are currently on we are going to be forced into radical
systemic modifications.
Much better to plan ahead.
Just as it was considered patriotic to plant crops and
harvest food for family and neighbors during the post-
World War II Victory Garden movement (in which an
estimated 20 million Americans participated), the
coming trend will follow similar patterns. People will reconnect
with their land and re-acquaint themselves with
what they eat, ultimately nurturing the health of their
communities. Market forces will drive individuals and
families in urban, suburban and rural settings toward
the soil. Sections of the landscape previously reserved
for suburban sprawl development will gradually convert
to local food production zones. Homeowners will turn
useless lawn into useful garden plots.


'''The Living Building Challenge 2.0'''

When the primary goal is true sustainability, then we must
always assess density and carrying capacity as a species
for a given place – beginning with our broader regions and
drilling down to our cities, neighborhoods, multifamily
buildings and single-family homes.

As discussed in previous Trim Tab issues, sustainability
hinges on density. Our current cities are not dense
enough and rely almost exclusively on the automobile
at the expense of public transportation, biking or
walking. It is our belief that cities will continue to get
more dense in the coming years which will greatly
lower their environmental footprint, and yet we have to
recognize that there is a tension between growing food
in communities and significant density – after all – there
is only so much space. Grow too much food in a city and
you reduce density, potentially causing even greater
environmental problems. Moreover, a living city should be
energy independent with rooftops and structures covered
with photovoltaic’s. When food and energy-generation
collide in a dense community, energy generation should
dominate. It would be extremely counter-productive to
replace a rooftop solar system with a rooftop garden in
order to grow food for the building’s residents as food can
be brought into the center of the city more efficiently.

Addressing the tension between density and sustainability,
and considering how food comes into proper play, involves
looking at the bigger picture of each community’s needs.
Projects in the urban core that satisfy density requirements
and function in self-sustaining ways should be released
from aggressive food production duties. Urban farming
should definitely play a role; but areas with greater
percentages of land and lower density levels should bear
more of the agricultural burden."


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Articles]]