
'''= "This course is targeting policy makers who are interested in learning how urban metabolism can help them develop more comprehensive and system urban policies in order to meet the Paris Agreement targets".''' [https://metabolismofcities.org/mooc]

URL = https://metabolismofcities.org/mooc

=Description=

Free Mooc on the [[Metabolism of Cities]]:

"The world is urbanising rapidly. In 2009, the number of people living in cities (around 3,5 billion) surpassed the number living in rural areas. While the urban population is hosted only on 3% of global land area, it is also responsible for over 70% of natural resources and energy use and for 60% pollution emissions and waste generation. While cities are responsible for the greatest share of man-made environmental impact, they are also the places 80% of global GDP is produced and are the nodes of innovation. Therefore, the fight against climate change will be won or lost in cities.

Yet, cities are extremely complex systems where social, economic, political, territorial, ecological, resource, waste, etc. challenges coexist. Urban metabolism is way to look at cities from a systemic point of view linking all the above mentioned challenges. This metaphor conceptualises the city as living organism where resource flows enter, are transformed or stocked and waste flows exit the territory. 

This course is targeting policy makers who are interested in learning how urban metabolism can help them develop more comprehensive and system urban policies in order to meet the Paris Agreement targets."



[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]