

=Example=

==San Francisco==

Policy at: http://www.spur.org/sites/default/files/blog_post_pdfs/SF_AB551_Implementing_Leg_Boar
d_Packet_July_22.pdf

By Khushboo Balwani:

"In cities across the world, urban agriculture is increasing access to local healthy food,
connecting communities, and creating local jobs. On Aug. 7, 2014, San Francisco was the
first city in California to establish an urban agriculture incentive zone (UAIZ), as permitted
by state Assembly Bill 551, to address two large obstacles faced by farmers and
gardeners – access to land and secure land tenure. This act allows owners of vacant
property within San Francisco to apply for tax reduction in exchange for putting their land
into agricultural use for at least five years. The law includes a number of requirements that
ensure community development and resource sharing. For example, in order to qualify for
tax reductions, property owners must include in their urban farm or gardening plan some
interface with the public, through either distribution or sales of food; educational activities
such as classes and workshops; or that the site will be used as a community garden with
members other than the property owner's family.

To ensure its best application, an agricultural commissioner is appointed to review the plan
and to conduct annual inspections. Another interesting feature of the law is that it limits the
use of pesticides and/or fertilizers to those that meet organic standards. San Francisco’s
Recreation and Park Departments is involved to help coordinate community outreach,
education, and the application process. The UAIZ law is an important step toward making 
health food more accessible, regenerating communities, relieving the tax burden for
landowners, creating jobs, and making better use of vacant lots, thus reducing blight and
crime."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)

=More information=

* Local news report about the law: http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/S-F-propertyowners-to-get-tax-break-from-5725876.php

* Implementation guide for Urban Agriculture Incentive Zones Act: http://ucanr.edu/sites/UrbanAg/files/190763.pdf

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]