
'''* Article: CHALLENGE OF NEW COMMONS – URBAN PUBLIC SPACES . Veronika Poklembovái, Tatiana Kluvánková-Oravskáii, Maroš Finkaiii.'''

URL = http://biogov.uclouvain.be/iasc/doc/full%20papers/Poklembova.pdf


=ABSTRACT=

"New commons are shared resources that have recently evolved or have been 
recognized as commons (Hess 2008). Urban commons, in this case urban public 
spaces, can be also put into this category. Urban public spaces are important parts of 
urban environment creating the framework for public life. There are many types of 
public spaces with different functions attracting various users. They often have 
contradicting requirements, but certain use level balancing between the two extremes 
of abandoned and overcrowded spaces is inevitable (Neuts 2011).
 
The question that raises here is  – how to manage urban spaces sustainably and to 
preserve their  quality in long term? Quality is related to the unique conditions of 
each space and so it is a result of search for its optimal use and design during the 
planning phase and represents a challenge for the management processes and 
practices to preserve it. Governing of shared resources involves making not simple 
decisions under uncertainty, in very complex and conflicting environments and 
contexts, but there are numerous examples of effective management of commons, 
mostly the traditional ones. Ostrom and her colleagues have identified a set of design 
principles associated with robust institutions that have successfully governed shared 
resources for generations (Dietz et al. 2002, Ostrom et al. 1999, 2008). But in 
contrast to traditional commons they do not necessarily apply to all new commons, 
including urban public spaces (Hess 2008). In this paper we are critically discussing 
with existing literature and case studies the applicability and relevance of the design 
principles for urban public spaces as urban commons. "
(http://biogov.uclouvain.be/iasc/doc/full%20papers/Poklembova.pdf)


[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]