
'''= a documentary film project about the power of mass collaboration, government and the Internet.'''

URL = http://www.usnowfilm.com/pages/1


=Description=


"In a world in which information is like air, what happens to power?

Us Now is a documentary film project about the power of mass
collaboration, government and the Internet.

Us Now tells the stories of online networks that are challenging the
existing notion of hierarchy.  For the first time, it brings together
the fore-most thinkers in the field of participative governance to
describe the future of government.

All of the material generated during the project will be available to
view online and the project will culminate in an hour long documentary
to be released publicly in January 2009.


'''SYNOPSIS'''

In his student flat in Colchester, Jack Howe is staring intently into
his computer screen. He is picking the team for Ebbsfleet United's FA
Trophy Semi-Final match against Aldershot . Around the world 35,000
other fans are doing the same thing, because together, they own and
manage the football club.  If distributed networks of people can run
complex organisations such as football clubs, what else can they do?

Us Now takes a look at how this type of participation could transform
the way that countries are governed.  It tells the stories of the
online networks whose radical self-organising structures threaten to
change the fabric of government forever.

Us Now follows the fate of Ebbsfleet United, a football club owned and
run by its fans;  Zopa, a bank in which everyone is the manager; and
Couch Surfing, a vast online network whose members share their homes
with strangers.

The founding principles of these projects -- transparency,
self-selection, open participation -- are coming closer and closer to
the mainstream of our social and political lives.  Us Now describes
this transition and confronts politicians George Osborne and Ed
Milliband with the possibilities for participative government as
described by Don Tapscott and Clay Shirky amongst others."
(http://www.usnowfilm.com/pages/1)


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Politics]]