

=Description=

"User-Generated Devices (UGD), allowing people to enjoy themselves making their own equipment with friends, are making a showing in the electronics industry, fueled by the outsourcing of development and manufacturing, open constituent technologies, and other trends. Only companies capable of discarding the paradigm of volume production will be able to evolve apace with this new dimension in user participation.

The development of UGDs is not being driven by the mass market, as in the past. Instead, innumerable "mini-communities" comprised of people who share the same interests as the developer have taken over. And this change will shake the foundations of the volume-production business model.

Since the birth of the electronics industry, there have always been hobbyists who enjoy making their own electronics kits and gadgets. Today, these are restricted to only a few fields, hard-core hobbyists all. The obstacles to designing and assembling handmade equipment are formidable, and as increasingly powerful functions make equipment design more complex than ever, users can access fewer elements of the final product. Worse, the key technologies implementing core product functionality are carefully protected manufacturer secrets. Users can only access a very few constituent technologies.

Over the last few years, though, the walls have been coming down, and there are signs that the world of handmade equipment will begin to push into the mainstream. Based on emerging trends such as hardware modularization and open-source software, along with outsourcing of development and manufacturing, progress toward user-centric development is being made round the world."
(http://techon.nikkeibp.co.jp/article/HONSHI/20090428/169511/)


[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]