
'''= does not depend on being kickstarted by a company. What is necessary here is simply the availability of platforms suitable to support crowdsourcing processes''' [http://snurb.info/node/1614]


=Description=

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva: 

"According to the basic definition of crowdsourcing, its main initiators are
companies. However, existing online platforms which support the creation
sharing and collaborative creation of user generated content in many cases
provide suitable environments where users can become the initiators of
crowdsourcing as well. This can be illustrated on the example of the relaunch of
‘Snacketti-Zwiebelringe’, the onion rings product of the company Zweifel in the
Swiss market (see also Kowalski, 2011 and Lüscher, 2010).

In summer 2009, two Facebook users established independent of each other
a group on Facebook dedicated to the request and wish to have the product
Snacketti-Zwiebelringe (onion rings) back on the Swiss market. The same product
was produced earlier by the company Zweifel. It was taken off the market 14
years ago because the market was not considered big enough by the company.
Within 1 year of the launch of the groups, the groups were able to recruit together
12,000 ‘likers’ and contributors. The voices requesting the onion rings back on the
market became louder and more demanding.

The company Zweifel at first only observed what was going on at the two
groups. As the groups became more popular and were able to recruit a critical
mass of users, they started to communicate with the groups and considered the
request on strategic level. As soon as the company started to think about the
request of the users on a strategic level, they started also to communicate the
different steps of the process within the two groups. Finally the users were
informed that Zweifel has decided to start the production of onion rings and to
introduce the product again to the Swiss market. In September 2010, 380 users,
members of the two groups, participated on the opening event of the production
of the onion rings.

This example of the onion rings is not the only one, where users initiate
and coordinate crowdsourcing processes. In the same period in 2010 for example,
about 20,000 Facebook users requested and were able to bring back on the market
the product ‘Yogi Drink Apfel’ produced by the company Emmi. These two and
other similar examples show that crowdsourcing might not be the privilege only
of companies. Users empowered by Social Media platforms as well as quick and
efficient communication means increasingly take over the initiative. Even more,
specialized intermediaries such as CrowdTogether.com are emerging that
intermediate the process of crowdsourcing among users. Thereby, the initiatives
of the users are not limited to co-creation and crowdsourcing of knowledge, ideas
and information. For example, the user-founders of localmotors.com claim to
build the car of the future and have attracted a community of users that support
them by providing car designs and other contributions. Users increasingly take
over the initiative and create ideas for products that they want and impose their
requirements on the companies.

In the future, it might be possible that there will be a growing number of
examples of this kind of user initiated crowdsourcing which is initiated
independent of the companies. How can companies profit and basically take
advantage of this development? First of all, these processes don't take place in an
organized way as the typical crowdsourcing initiated by companies. They pop up
and can become a big issue per chance, depending on the fact if the initiative by
single users gets enough supporters in Social Media. Second, such independent
initiatives might not be completely in line with the strategy of the company. While
company initiated crowdsourcing usually originates out of the strategic directions
of the company, user initiated crowdsourcing is independent of the strategic
visions of a company. Given this, it can impose on the company requirements
which have never been considered by the company. The positive aspects of this
are that the company gets a clear view on what customers want.

Another aspect of user initiated crowdsourcing that might become a
problem for companies is the lack of awareness for it. In order to become aware of
such initiatives, it is necessary that companies have a very efficient monitoring of
Social Media in place. With the help of Social Media monitoring, they can identify
such initiatives early enough in order to be able to be prepared and answer in an
efficient way to the requests posed by the users."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf) 


=Discussion=

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva:

"The example of user initiated crowdsourcing shows that the user is changing and
his role in crowdsourcing processes is evolving. From pure solution provider, the
user is becoming the initiator of crowdsourcing processes. This process is enabled
on the one hand with the communication and coordination capabilities of Social
Media but also increasingly by specialized crowdsourcing platforms as
CrowdTogether. These platforms are, targeting the end consumer as
crowdsourcing initiator. Furthermore, not only the creation of digital goods and
information is subject to user initiated crowdsourcing but also crowdsourcing for
physical products.

The question now is how companies can take advantage of this new role of
users in crowdsourcing. One potential scenario might be as follows: The user in
the role of initiator of crowdsourcing can become a new intermediary for
companies. Instead of the company initiating, guiding and coordinating
crowdsourcing process, this can be outsourced or delegated to lead-users who are
able to attract a community and work on the development of the products and
services. This kind of relationships is similar to relationships that are currently
established by companies and open source software development communities.

The crowd harnessing example shows that besides providing input in
especially dedicated crowdsourcing platforms, users are also providing a lot of
contributions in form of knowledge, experience, opinions, and statements in
various other communication channels which are supporting and enabling a
participative user. The question is if this kind of bottom up contribution is
relevant enough to be harnessed and the basis for a bottom-up crowdsourcing
process based on principles of curation.

Both types of user initiated crowdsourcing are based on a new role of the
user and can have new implication for companies and the society."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf) 


=More Information=

* [[Zweifel - User-Initiated Crowdsourcing]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]