

==Typology==

"There are five basic models: 

i) voluntary contributions, 

ii) charging viewers for services - pay-per-item or subscription models, including bundling
with existing subscriptions, 

iii) advertising-based models, 

iv) licensing of content and technology to third
parties, and 

v) selling goods and services to the community (monetising the audience via online sales).

These models can also remunerate creators, either by sharing revenues or by direct payments from other
users."


Discussion [http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/57/14/38393115.pdf]:

"At this stage there are essentially five approaches to monetise UCC (User Created Content), a combination of which are
illustrated by three concrete cases in Table 6 (see also VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, 2007).

===Voluntary donations===

In a frequently utilised model, the user makes the content freely available, like that of a musician
performing on the street, but would solicit donations from users. Such models are currently in place on
many sites with a donate-button, often encouraging those accessing the content to donate to the creator
or the institutions (usually online by credit card or via PayPal). A significant number of blogs, wikis,
online video and online music creators ask for donations from their audience for activities such as web
hosting and site maintenance, or for the content as such. A common feature of certain non-commercial
UCC sites is that they manage to run their operations with quite limited funding (often only the time
invested by volunteers and users). Wikipedia, for instance, spent less than USD 750 000 in 2005 to sustain
its growth and it frequently draws on donations to finance these costs (beyond the donation of time and
expertise which are also donated by its users).40 Blogging and citizen journalism sites such as Global
Voices Online are supported by bloggers who commit their time but its operating expenses are funded by
grants from foundations or even news companies (such as Reuters in the case of Global Voices Online).
Such donations of time or money have been the cornerstone of Internet developments in areas such as the
open source movement (e.g. for the support of free Internet browsers) or other user-driven innovations on
the Internet. New voluntary payment models for the promotion of UCC content and platforms based on
reciprocity, peer-based reputation and recommendations have been proposed (Regner et al, 2006).

===Charging viewers for services===

Sites may charge those viewing UCC, whereas the posting of content is free. This can take the form of
a pay-per-item or a subscription model. The popularity of the UCC has to be high to be able to charge as
competing sites are free and as making small online payments and entering credit card information may be
too burdensome or impracticable.

Pay-per-item model: In that scenario, users make per-item (micro)-payments to UCC platforms or to
the creators themselves to access individual pieces of content. iSTockphot, for instance, offers
photographs, illustrations and stock video from its user-generated stock for USD 5 each. Platforms
exclusively hosting UCC or established digital content sale points (such as online music stores, video-onDSTI/
demand platforms, or online retailers), for instance, could offer UCC as part of their repertoire on pay-peritem
terms. The fact that no shelf space is needed to stock a variety of content facilitates this model.
Subscription model: This model would entail consumers paying to subscribe to services offering
UCC. Yet paying a subscription to access others content is rarely used as a model. Rather users pay a
subscription for enhanced hosting and other services for one's own content and access to others content.

One of these models involves two-tiered subscription services, whereby a user may opt for a basic
account free of charge that provides a set amount of services or for a pro account that users pay a
subscription or other fee for. The pro accounts provide enhanced features, more (or even unlimited)
hosting space, and other options that are attractive to the user.41 A new approach involves a hosting-based
model with a cooperative element, such as Lulu.tv. Users pay for the service provided by the site, but are
also remunerated on the basis of the popularity of their content (see later discussion on this point).

The bundling of UCC into existing subscriptions and associated payments may be an easier option.
Cable TV operators, Internet Service Providers (ISPs), digital radio services and other media outlets derive
most of their revenue through monthly subscription fees paid by the users (e.g. EUR 29.99 for a monthly
Internet triple play offer in France). To remain attractive to users, such operators could opt to carry UCC,
either by creating special channels exclusively devoted to UCC (such as the case with FreeTV in France)
or by airing a selection of UCC on the regular programs. In both cases, users pay for the UCC content via
their usual ISP or cable subscription.


===Advertising-based models===

(Monetising the audience via advertising)

Advertising is often seen as a more likely source of revenue surrounding UCC and a significant driver
for UCC. Models based on advertising enable users and hosts to preserve access that is free of charge to
the content while bringing in revenue. The economics of such a service are often compared to free web
mail where users get a free service, and owners of the service get to serve ads to this audience. Payment for
the advertising depends on numerous factors: number of users on UCC sites, related web site usage (dwell
time on site, depth of visit / page views per session / share of repeat visits), or clicks on the actual
advertisement banner leading the user to the webpage of the brand being advertised. Viable sustainable
business models are only likely to work with a large enough user base to attract enough advertisers and
actions by users generating revenue flows for the site.

Services that host UCC make use of advertising on the site (including banners, embedded video ads
and branded channels or pages) to generate revenue. The advertisements can be specific to an audience
most likely to be attracted by certain UCC platforms (often popular, young target groups) or to certain
content being watched by the user. When users search or watch a particular video, related advertising is
shown on the side bar, i.e. banners or short trailers start as the computer cursor moves across a banner.

Many UCC platforms such as Fanfiction.Net are relying on services to drive advertisement revenues
(e.g. Google AdSense, Microsoft, or the service provided by the UCC hosting site itself such as
FeedBurner Ad Network for blogs). Google AdSense automatically delivers text and image ads that are
targeted to the UCC site, the requested UCC content, the users geographic location and other factors (for
example, travel ads for China when searching for the keyword 
China on a video site). When users click
on the ad, that advertisement service receives per-click revenues from the company being advertised. In
turn, it then pays the UCC site hosting its ads. Some UCC sites are also redistributing part of this
advertising money with those creating or owning the content. These models provide independent UCC
sites (some owned by individuals) with access to a large base of advertisers.

Advertising may also be placed within the content, such as within a video. Popular video podcasts
also incorporate advertisements where users can click to sites from within the video. Increasingly,
branded channels have been launched on UCC platforms where users can view content from a special
brand or media publisher. Virtual worlds like Calypso allow firms to create and display advertisements.

It is expected that sophisticated targeting techniques will increasingly enable advertisers to create
targeted ad messages, rather than the interruptive spots used by most sites. The quality of the targeted
nature of the advertisement will depend on how well videos or UCC is paired with relevant advertisements.
Currently, advertisements are often displayed on the basis of tags and keywords which uploaders create.
These may be more or less reliable with some users not creating keywords or using misleading ones to
attract more traffic.

UCC platforms have already received substantial up-front revenues from third players wanting to
advertise to this community. In August 2006, Google agreed to deliver at least USD 900 million in ad
revenue over three and a half years to News Corp. for the right to broker advertising that appears on
MySpace and some other sites (van Duyn and Waters, 2006). Microsoft Corp. also recently agreed to be
the exclusive provider of advertising to Facebook (Sandoval, 2006a).

Although most of the hopes to monetise UCC are currently being placed on purely advertising-related
business models, it will take time to show whether these models will work (c.f. also VTT Technical
Research Centre of Finland, 2007 which argues that social media cannot fully flourish on ad-based
models). Advertisers are concerned that the user audience may have grown accustomed to free content and
will migrate to ad-free sites. Also some advertisers are concerned to be randomly associated with UCC
they cannot control or foresee (e.g. a car advertisement being shown before a UCC video about a car
accident or other inappropriate content).


===Licensing of content and technology to third parties===

Increasingly UCC is being considered for airing on other channels and this act of licensing content to
third parties (e.g. television stations) may be a source of revenue. As elaborated later, according to most
terms of services of UCC sites, users agree that they have given the site a licence to use the content without
payment, sometimes reserving the right to commercially exploit the work.44 Sometimes this may include
the right of the UCC site to licence the content to third parties but a revenue sharing model between
content creators and UCC site may apply. Increasingly deals to licence content to third parties or to
cooperate with third parties to share the content involve mobile carriers (e.g. the recent Verizon and
YouTube Watch on Mobile service)
Finally, UCC platforms can enter into commercial agreements with third parties to provide their
technology to the latter (e.g. DailyMotion entering a commercial agreement with the French ISP Neuf
Telecom to provide its video sharing service technology). Some UCC platforms (e.g. On2 Flix) are more
back-end service providers to facilitate the process of UCC video services of third parties.



===Selling goods and services to community=== 

(Monetising the audience via online sales)


Another option is to capitalise on the large, captive user base and market own or third party products
to users. Due to the network effects, successful UCC sites are likely to have a large user base. This large
audience can be monetised with UCC sites selling items or services directly to their users. Similarly to the
above examples in the pay-per-item or the subscription section, blogging, photo sharing and other sites
may sell particular one-off or continued services to their users. But UCC platforms such as virtual worlds
or social networking services also allow them to sell the use of online games, avatars, virtual accessories or
even virtual land to their users. Korean social networking site CyWorld, for instance, receives considerable
revenues from the sale of digital items such as decorations for a user profile or furniture for ones virtual
miniroom. Users use Acorns as currency in the CyWorld Shop purchased via credit card.

UCC sites can also cooperate with third parties to monetise their audience via allowing the latter to
sell directly to their users while taking a share of the revenue. For instance, the Mypurchase service of
MySpace will provide the interface for creators to sell their music, taking a portion of sales revenues in
exchange. The popular Japanese social networking site Mixi has several approaches, one of which is to
allow users to rate and review books CDs, DVDs, games, electronics and other items and linking users
directly to Amazon Japan with one click to purchase those items (calling this social commerce) or to
listen to music which can later be bought over iTunes.

UCC platforms could also allow for transactions amongst its users while taking a share of the revenue.
Depending on the terms of service, other business models may involve the selling of anonymised
information about users and their tastes and behaviour to market research and other firms."
(http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/57/14/38393115.pdf)

==Economic Impact==

"The shift to Internet-based media is only beginning to affect content publishers and broadcasters. At
the outset, UCC may have been seen as competition as: 

i) users may create and watch UCC at the expense
of traditional media, reducing advertising revenues, 

ii) users become more selective in their media
consumption (especially younger age groups), 

iii) some UCC platforms host unauthorised content from media publishers. 

However, some traditional media organisations have shifted from creating on-line
content to creating the facilities and frameworks for UCC creators to publish. They have also been making
their websites and services more interactive through user comment and ratings and content diffusion. TV
companies are also licensing content and extending on-air programs and brands to UCC platforms.
There are also potentially growing impacts of UCC on independent or syndicated content producers.
Professional photographers, graphic designers, free-lance journalists and similar professional categories
providing pictures, news videos, articles or other content have started to face competition from freely
provided amateur-created content.

...


Despite the non-commercial context, user-created content is already an important economic
phenomenon with direct impact on various industries. UCC has actively and effectively contributed to the
availability of broadband content. The spread of UCC and the amount of attention devoted to this area by
users seems to be a significant disruptive force for how content is created, consumed and for the industries
traditionally supplying content. This disruption creates economic opportunities and challenges which vary
according to market participants and their strategies. Also, the trend towards monetisation of UCC is just
starting and often figures on impacts directly attributable to the phenomenon are not available.
The next section discusses the economic implications of UCC while showing how the business
models invoked earlier and efforts to monetise UCC may affect various industry participants. At this early
stage those economic impacts  especially in terms of GDP growth and employment - are hard or
impossible to quantify.

As reflected in Table 7, in the context of UCC, different industry sectors and firms have very different
rationales and economic impacts.46 The specific business models and economic impacts on UCC platforms
were discussed in the earlier section on value chains and emerging business models.

While in the context of UCC, most press reports centre on the impact of UCC on traditional media
firms, the more immediate impacts may be on users and non-media firms. The more immediate positive
impacts in terms of growth, market entry of new firms and employment are currently with ICT goods and
services providers and newly forming UCC platforms which attract significant investment. Another set of
firms particularly active in monetising UCC are search engines, portals, and aggregators which are seeking
to formulate business models surrounding search, aggregation and distribution of this content which is
often based on online advertisement.

Impacts are also starting to be felt by certain professional (free-lance) content producers such as
journalists, photographers, and others who now compete with freely available web content.


===Users / Creators===
 
New models are also emerging which allow for remuneration of the content creators (i.e. creators of
original works) as, for example, surveys of younger age groups point to greater willingness to place ads at
the end of videos, to feature brands in the video and to derive revenues from their work.52 A distinction
must be made between models that garner revenue for the creators themselves and models which entail
revenue sharing between creator and host.

Originally, the possibilities for users to derive profits directly and without intermediary from their
works were limited. A co-operative-based model is one where the creators contribute money to the service,
and then this revenue is redistributed among creators. A hybrid model, such as Lulu.tv, combines the cooperative
method with shared ad-based revenues. Users pay for the service provided by the site, but then
they are remunerated on the basis of the popularity of their content. There is also the possibility of flat-fee
subscription services in which creators would be remunerated.

New services have arisen which allow for unlimited uploading and exchange of various content and
which are financed by monthly fees from subscribers or Internet Service Providers. The Digital Media
Exchange (DMX) is such a model based on P2P technology and operated as a non-profit co-operative.53
Beyond unlimited exchange it allows users to make derivative works from the content while being
copyright compliant. DMX collects monthly fees from subscribers or their ISPs, and pays all of the
collected fees to content suppliers.

Most revenues for creators are likely to come from revenue-sharing models between creator and host
which again are based on advertising revenues discussed earlier. In the case of creator-based advertising,
users would utilise advertising on, within, or surrounding the content they created. For example, bloggers
may put Google AdSense advertisements on their site in order to obtain revenue. A lot of new companies
and software tools are allowing users to post content and be remunerated (e.g. Ripple Share). UCC
platforms are usually involved in remunerating content creators. In Korea, Mgoon has introduced a website
tag story where users post their own content and share advertising profits generated by them with the
company. Korean Shotech UCC site has started to share 30 to 40% of its advertising proceeds with UCC
makers. Other upstarts such as Revver, Feedburner, Blip.tv and Panjea.com share at least 50% of their ad
revenue with users who create their content.55 It is expected that the quality of the UCC can be improved
via remuneration of its creators.

Also, professional and paying opportunities can arise for users engaging in the creation of content. For
example, students in popular lip-synching videos were later hired to be in commercials. Remixers, bloggers
or video podcasters have been hired by major music companies or major media companies.
Turning to the users who consume the content, the latter benefit usually from free access to more
diverse content which may be entertaining, educational or serve other purposes. Especially information and
knowledge commons mentioned earlier can add significantly to the welfare and entertainment of citizens."
(http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/57/14/38393115.pdf)

==Monetisation of user-created content and new business models==

"Commercial entities, including media companies, are playing an increasing role in supporting,
searching, aggregating, filtering, hosting, and diffusing UCC. Direct revenue generation from this
phenomenon for the creators of the content or for established commercial entities (e.g. media companies,
platforms hosting UCC) are only starting to emerge. Until recently, sites hosting UCC were essentially
non-commercial ventures of enthusiasts or start-ups with little or no revenues but with increasing finance
from venture capitalists. These sites often did not have business plans showing how revenues or profits
would be produced, some losing significant money day-on-day due to the high bandwidth costs. Rather
their objective was to increase the user-base by appealing to ever-greater audiences and users, potentially
with an eye to selling their business or starting to implement business models at a later stage.
Yet when projects reach a certain size considerable financial resources are necessary for the
technology, bandwidth and organisation to keep it going. Also, given that many UCC platforms host
unauthorised content from third parties, they face challenges with respect to remunerating the content
originators.

UCC sites are also increasingly subject to business and investor interests. Mixi, the Japanese SNS site,
for instance, and Open BC/Xing, a German business SNS site, have been listed on stock exchanges.
Moreover, established media conglomerates but also Internet-based companies have been increasingly
interested in deriving revenues from UCC sites. Firms such as News Corp, Google, Sony and Yahoo have
invested significant amounts of money to buy UCC sites."

(http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/57/14/38393115.pdf)


=More Information=

* [[Open Content Business Models]]


[[Category:Business Models]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]