
Excerpt from Sonali Shah's [[Open Beyond Software]] essay in [[Open Sources 2.0]]


=Examples=

Sonali Shah:

"'''Sports Equipment Innovation by Users & Their Communities'''

Both users and manufacturers contributed to the development of equipment innovations
in the windsurfing, skateboarding, and snowboarding industries. Users are defined as
individuals or firms that expect to directly benefit from a product or service by using it (von
Hippel 1988). In contrast, manufacturers are those who expect to benefit from manufacturing
and selling a product, service, or related knowledge; thus, firms, entrepreneurs, and inventors
seeking to sell ideas, products, or services are all examples of manufacturers. To illustrate,
snowboarders are users of snowboards. Firms such as Burton and Gnu are manufacturers of
snowboards. An inventor who hears that there is a market for improved snowboard bindings and
develops a new type of binding with the intent of patenting and licensing it is categorized as a
manufacturer.


'''The User Innovation Process in Three Sports'''

This section describes the process by which users and their communities develop
innovations. I begin with an example that illustrates this process. The following passage
describes how Larry Stanley and the community of windsurfing enthusiasts around him
innovated in the sport of windsurfing.

Mike Horgan and Larry Stanley began jumping and attempting aerial tricks and turns
with their windsurfing boards in 1974. The problem was that they flew off in mid-air because
there was no way to keep the board with them. As a result, they hurt their feet and legs,
damaged the board, and soon lost interest. In 1978 West German Jurgen Honscheid came to
participate in the first Hawaiian World Cup and was introduced to jumping. A renewed
enthusiasm for jumping arose and soon a group of windsurfers were all trying to outdo each
other. Then Larry Stanley remembered the Chip - a small experimental board that he had
equipped with footstraps a year earlier for the purpose of controlling the board at high speeds -
and thought:

''It’s dumb not to use this for jumping.''

News of the innovation spread quickly and instructions for how to make and
attach footstraps to a windsurf board were shared freely. Later, Larry Stanley, Mike
Horgan and a small set of windsurfing friends would begin the commercial production
and sale of footstraps (and other innovations). Today the footstrap is considered a
standard feature on windsurf boards.

This example illustrates three key components of innovation development by users. First,
the act of use itself creates new needs and desires among users that lead to the creation of new
equipment and techniques. Second, user cooperation in communities is critical to prototyping,
improving, and diffusing solutions to those needs. Working jointly allows rapid development
and simultaneous experimentation, however working jointly also requires that users openly
reveal their ideas and prototypes to others. Third, user innovations – even after they have been
freely revealed - are sometimes commercialized."
(http://faculty.washington.edu/skshah/Shah%20-%20Open%20Beyond%20Software.pdf)


=Discussion=

==How Important is Community-Based Innovation in These Sports?==

Sonali Shah:


"In 2000, I conducted a longitudinal study of the development and commercialization
histories of 57 key equipment innovations in the windsurfing, skateboarding, and snowboarding
industries (Shah 2000). The aim of the study was to understand the extent to which users did or
did not contribute to innovative and commercial activity in these sports. The study found that
users and their communities were critical to the emergence and development of these sports.
Sports equipment users developed the first-of-type innovation in each of the three sports
studied, that is, users developed the first skateboard, the first snowboard, and the first windsurfer.
Users also developed 57% of all major improvement innovations in the sample, while
manufacturers developed 27% of the major improvement innovations. The remaining 16% were
developed by other functional sources of innovation, such as joint user-manufacturer teams or
professional athletes.


'''Product Origins: First-of-Type Innovations'''

In each of the three sports studied, users developed the initial first-of-type innovation. In
each instance, the innovator(s) engaged in the process of bricolage, using the skills and materials
at hand to create the innovation.

For example, skateboarding began in the early 1900s. At that time, children played and
rode on wooden scooters, often homemade, consisting of a board with roller skate wheels and a
handle attached for control. Over the next five decades, adventurous users removed or did
without the handle (it often broke off), thereby creating the first skateboards.

In the case of snowboards, people have been trying to stand up on their sleds for ages.
Experts agree, however, that the “formal” history of the snowboard began with Sherman
Poppen’s Snurfer (Howe 1998; Stevens 1998). In 1965 Poppen noticed his daughter and a friend
standing up on their sleds as they slid down a hill. He went to his workshop and used the
materials available to create the first prototype – two skis bound together with a string attached at
the nose for stability – of what would later become known as the “Snurfer” (a name created by
combining the words snow and surfing).

In the case of windsurfing, an individual user, Newman Darby, was the initial innovator.
In 1964 Darby, a Pennsylvania sailboat enthusiast and amateur boat builder, created the first
windsurfer by fixing a universal joint to the base of a mast on a floating platform. The universal
joint – a fundamental feature of the windsurfer - allowed the board and mast to move relative to
one another. This in turn meant that the sailor could directly manage the direction of sail by
standing up and holding the boom and tipping the mast.


'''Major Improvement Innovations'''

Manufacturers developed 27% (n=12) of the major improvement innovations in the
sample; users developed 57% (n=26)7. Major improvement innovations are an important subset
of overall innovative activity in the sport. They are those equipment innovations identified by
multiple experts as being most critical to the development of the sport.

An existing manufacturer developed two major improvement innovations in the sample.

Existing manufacturers might (theoretically) be of two types: those in closely related productcategories (e.g. sailing, skiing, surfing) and those with production or design capabilities useful in
mass-producing the product. The existing manufacturer observed in this study - NHS - was a
small, Northern California firm founded by three surfing buddies to design and build surfboards.

A surplus of fiberglass and a deficit of customers led the trio to begin designing skateboards.

NHS ultimately developed two key skateboarding innovations: the use of precision ball bearings
and skateboard truck modifications that allowed each wheel to move independently of the others.

Manufacturers organized specifically to produce for the sport in question developed
three major improvement innovations in the sample.

Existing sports equipment component suppliers developed seven major improvement
innovations in the sample. These innovations generally involved transferring specific technology
and know-how from an existing sport to the novel one. For example, a maker of fins for
surfboards was asked to design a fin to solve some windsurfer-specific problems. Similarly, a
producer of sailboat sails worked to improve the design of windsurfing sails and made several
innovations. In most cases, the innovative components suppliers were small craft shops run by
their founder-owners.

Users and user-manufacturers developed 58% of all improvement innovations in the
sports studied. The term user-manufacturer describes innovative users who founded firms after
prototyping and beginning to refine an innovation(s) – and, in most cases, also after sharing the
innovation(s) with others8. These individuals benefited from their innovation(s) both through
use and financially. As discussed earlier, the firms they founded are generally best characterized
as small, lifestyle firms rather than mass market producers.
(http://faculty.washington.edu/skshah/Shah%20-%20Open%20Beyond%20Software.pdf)



=More Information=

#[[User Innovation]]
#[[User Innovation in the Automobile Sector]]



[[Category:Cases]]