


=Source=

Mentioned by Sonali Shah, in her essay, [[Open Beyond Software]], in the book [[Open Sources 2.0]]

URL = http://faculty.washington.edu/skshah/Shah%20-%20Open%20Beyond%20Software.pdf


=Examples=

Sonali Shah:

"Franz (1999) describes innovations in automotive accessories made by middle-class
American leisure travelers during the early 1900s. She reports that users built and added such
features as radiator hoods, safety devices, interior heaters, automobile tops, trunks, reclining
seats, and electric ignitions to their cars. Some even replaced the standard body altogether. “The
rewards of tinkering lay… in the cultural space of leisure where amateurs produced their own
narratives of ingenuity and claimed knowledge of the new machine (Franz 1999, pg. 149).”

Many of these innovators shouldered the cost of disseminating news of their innovations
to other automobile enthusiasts. In the early 1900s a high number of journals for automobile
enthusiasts - “written by and for devotees of the new “sport” (Franz 1999, pg. 198)” - published
innovator-written “how-to” articles. Existing manufacturers often learned of innovations via the
innovators themselves, through requests for repairs, phone calls suggesting that the manufacturer
adopt the innovations, and articles in the hobbyist journals (one of the journals was sponsored by
Ford). Despite these avenues for information transfer and the fact that many innovating users did
not patent their innovations, substantial time lags existed between the time an innovation was
made and communicated to other users and when manufacturers incorporated it into commercial
products."
(http://faculty.washington.edu/skshah/Shah%20-%20Open%20Beyond%20Software.pdf)



=More Information=

#[[User Innovation in Sports]]
#Franz, K. (1999). Narrating Automobility: Travelers, Tinkerers, and Technological Authority in
the Twentieth Century (Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation). Providence, Rhode Island,
Brown University.


[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:Design]]