
'''* Book: Uses and Abuses of History for Life. Friedrich Nietzsche.'''

URL = 

=Summary=

Jonathan Bi:

“In the Uses and Abuses of History for Life, Nietzsche is writing to a Germany that is suffering from an excess of history and culture. What appears to be, prima facie, a critique of his contemporary intellectual climate and educational failures is actually a treatise on the fundamental metaphysical substance of life and the foundational epistemic building block of knowledge. Nietzsche’s essay is worth reading because it challenges modernity’s worship of knowledge with such convincing eloquence. Life should not be in service of knowledge, as it is now, but knowledge should be in the service of life.

Three key capacities are necessary to subjugate history and, more generally, knowledge under the needs of life: the suprahistoric capacity to synthesize and unify, the unhistoric capacity to forget and repress, and the historic capacity to record and remember.

First, the individual must set a bound or “horizon” upon his sphere of knowledge by finding a balance between the unhistoric and historic, by forgetting and remembering just the right amount. Forget important information, and you are bound to repeat past failures. Remember too much, and you will be paralyzed with information. Nietzsche comes to the surprising conclusion that life, if it is to be lived in its most vivid and vigorous manner, can only burgeon when it is safe from certain pieces of knowledge. It is the unhistoric drive that represents life. Second, one must synthesize and unify whatever knowledge is in one’s horizon as to make a congruent being. This is done by the suprahistorical capacity under the dictates of the unhistoric, that is to say, under the needs of life.

If a balance is achieved between these capacities, one can adapt and manipulate history for the use of life in three legitimate ways. Monumental history highlights the great figures of the past and invites the presently ambitious to imitate greatness. Antiquarian history emphasizes lineage and helps the currently distraught and lost feel justified in their existence. Lastly, critical history exposes the injustice of the past and helps the oppressed of today with resources to enact change. None of these historiographies is objective by any stretch of the imagination. They are highly subjective selections, highlights, distortions or even untruths but they are made to serve whatever needs life and society has at the moment. Vergil’s Aeneid comes to mind: it was highly fictionalized but served a clear purpose for making life vigorous.

Contemporary historiography, however, is a fourth kind of history: objective history. It is concerned with knowing as much as possible, with collecting all of the facts. It is not produced from a balance of the three capacities but a fetishization of the historic, of remembering.

Nietzsche wants to say that there is no such objectivity. We always select and ignore facts, highlight certain causal chains and deemphasize others. The subject is always there doing the interpretation. What ends up happening, when we try to be objective in our history is that we simply turn ourselves into so impotent and weak characters as to not have any of our own personality reflected in the history we write. We are content calling that “objective” which is merely bland and flavorless. This history ends up an uncontrollable and unsynthesizeable mess. Instead, we should only read history that is interpreted through the lens of great figures. Only he who has made history knows what to preserve in it.
His deeper criticism is that this messy, unsynthesized jumble of historical knowledge has rendered his age ironic, cynical, and disgusted. It is ironic because there is such a great disparity between the knowledgeable interiors and the impotent exteriors. People can pull facts out left and right, but there is no unity in these facts and no congruence from which they can create anything of their own. A culture fascinated with history will leave nothing worthy of history. It is cynical because of Hegel. It would be a sad but noble fate if Germany rightfully recognized itself as a declining heir to the great Greco cultures through antiquarian history. But Hegel flipped this on its head: modernity is now the pinnacle of all history. Furthermore, Hegel suggests that history progresses not by great figures, who are but products of the masses, but of the spirit in the masses themselves. Nietzsche believes that meaningful progress is only made by great individuals who do not grow out of but oppose the movement of the masses. Hegel’s view is a cynical one because it takes away the agency of any actor in history and subjugates it to the spirit. Lastly, this culture, polluted by knowledge and history, is one that must become disgusted of itself because it is impotent. It is so paralyzed by diversity and an abundance in knowledge that it no longer knows how to act, how to live. It will soon see that it will create nothing of importance, and feel disgusted towards itself.

The solution which Nietzsche prescribes is unsurprising: reintroduce the unhistorical capacity of forgetting and the suprahistorical capacity of synthesis. We need to live life not in the pursuit of knowledge but by examining our needs of life and adapting knowledge to satisfy those needs. We may end up more stupid and less knowledgeable by contemporary standards, but that is fine: we will be more filled with life.”

(https://johnathanbi.com/book-notes-summaries/the-uses-and-abuses-of-history-for-life)



=Typology=

Jonathan Bi:

==Three Relationships with History==

"Nietzsche introduces us to two types of relationships with history — the historical and the unhistorical — by depicting their most exaggerated caricatures.
The unhistorical caricature is the cow who can barely remember it’s previous thought but is incredibly happy because of it. What is constitutive for happiness is “the ability to forget or, expressed in more scholarly fashion, the capacity to feel unhistorically during its duration. He who cannot sink down on the threshold of the moment and forget all the past, who cannot stand balanced like a goddess of victory without growing dizzy and afraid, will never know what happiness is”. Forgetting is so central to happiness because it enables one to be fully immersed in the present moment: “it conceals nothing and at every instant appears wholly as what it is; it can therefore never be anything but honest”. This is comparable to the bird of prey that acts without free will and is all the better for it because it did not have to alienate and objectify itself through thought. Its instincts are not repressed with self-control and its experiences are not tainted by overthinking. It just is.

The historical caricature is the man who can never forget and is forced to remember every single detail of all of his experiences all the time. This is not a man who only has the gift of perfect memory but one who is cursed to have this knowledge front and center in his consciousness consistently. Not only would he not have the capacity to be happy, but he also would find it very hard to just live because he would be “condemned to see everywhere a state of becoming: such a man would no longer believe in his own being, would no longer believe in himself, would see everything flowing asunder in moving points and would lose himself in this stream of becoming: like a true pupil of Heraclitus, he would in the end hardly dare to raise his finger”. Just as one cannot make any sense from a static screen on TV, even though it is the state at which the most amount of information is encoded, the man who cannot forget is burdened with so much knowledge that he is unable to make sense of the world. Everywhere he sees a meaningless “becoming” that overloads his senses. Unlike the cow, he cannot find any solid, stable “being” from which he can act with full congruence.

The unhistorical — the capacity to forget, repress, delude, distort — is thus necessary for life because it is the only state from which we can act. “We shall thus have to account the capacity to feel to a certain degree unhistorically as being more vital and more fundamental, inasmuch as it constitutes the foundation upon which alone anything sound, healthy and great, anything truly human, can grow. The unhistorical is like an atmosphere within which alone life can germinate and with the destruction of which it must vanish”. With that said, the historical — the capacity to remember, “think, reflect, compare, distinguish” — is constitutive for what it means to be human because only through it do we improve and progress in a manner that animals do not. “Only through the power of employing the past for the purposes of life and of again introducing into history that which has been done and is gone — did man become man: but with an excess of history man again ceases to exist, and without that envelope of the unhis¬torical he would never have begun or dared to begin”.

We have already arrived at the central thrust of Nietzsche’s argument: ”the unhistorical and the historical are necessary in equal measure for the health of an individual, of a people, and of a culture”. But the rest of the essay cautions more of the latter than the former for two reasons. First, Nietzsche writes in and is addressing a German nation which prides itself with the historical. Nietzsche is correcting an imbalance by warning against the dangers of not being able to forget. Second, while the two capacities are equally necessary, the ability to forget is, in some sense, more foundational: “it is possible to live almost without memory, and to live happily moreover, as the animal demonstrates; but it is altogether impossible to live at all without forgetting”. As is already evident, Nietzsche’s scope when using the word “history” is much broader than just past events and “life” refers to much more than just civil society. History sometimes means historical events but often refers to knowledge in general. Similarly, life is often used to refer to German civil society but, in it’s broadest sense, refers to the fundamental ontological building block: the “dark insatiable power that thirsts for itself”. Life is the fundamental force in the universe responsible for all creation and destruction. What appears to be a treatise about history and civil society is, at its core, a manifesto to overthrow epistemology (knowledge) and crown metaphysics (life) as the rightful foundation. It aims to find a better balance between these two forces which are represented by the historical and the unhistorical respectively.

There are two primary methods in which this balance is struct: the horizon and the plastic powers. The horizon is a barrier to block out crippling knowledge. It is created by the capacity to forget as well as to remember: the unhistorical and the historical. “That which such a nature cannot subdue it knows how to forget; it no longer exists, the horizon is rounded and closed, and there is nothing left to suggest there are people, passions, teachings, goals lying beyond it“. Of course, the same knowledge that is crippling for one might not be for another depending on one’s plastic powers. “To determine this degree, and therewith the boundary at which the past has to be forgotten if it is not to become the gravedigger of the present, one would have to know exactly how great the plastic power of a man, a people, a culture is: I mean by plastic power the capacity to develop out of oneself in one’s own way, to transform and incorporate into oneself what is past and foreign, to heal wounds, to replace what has been lost, to recreate broken moulds”. The strength of one’s plastic powers and the distance of one’s horizon is positively correlated: “The stronger the innermost roots of a man’s nature, the more readily will he be able to assimilate and appropriate the things of the past; and the most powerful and tremendous nature would be characterized by the fact that it would know no boundary at all at which the historical sense began to overwhelm it; it would draw to itself and incorporate into itself all the past, its own and that most foreign to it, and as it were transform it into blood.“

The horizon is created by the unhistorical capacity and the historical capacity. Similarly, the unhistorical capacity is also partially responsible for the plastic powers. Only the fundamental force of life can “develop out of oneself in one’s own way … heal wounds … replace what has been lost … recreate broken moulds”. But there is another constitutive capacity responsible for the plastic powers: synthesis. Only through synthesis can one “transform and incorporate into oneself what is past and foreign”. Thus, we must turn towards the third and last relationship with history: the suprahistorical. Just as the historic is defined by remembering and the unhistoric by forgetting, the suprahistorical is defined by its capacity to synthesize.

The suprahistorical ability to synthesize is founded upon a specific form of wisdom, the wisdom to see that history is generated by the unhistoric. That is to say, it is only in the cow-like unhistoric state where one is not thinking about consequences, justice, or anything, does one have the direct access to that immense power of life which alone is strong enough to make history. This wisdom recognizes “the essential condition of all hap-penings [as the] blindness and injustice in the soul of him who acts”. 


Nietzsche elaborates:

It is the condition in which one is the least capable of being just; narrow-minded, ungrateful to the past, blind to dangers, deaf to warnings, one is a little vortex of life in a dead sea of darkness and oblivion: and yet this condition — unhistorical, anti-historical through and through — is the womb not only of the unjust but of every just deed too; and no painter will paint his picture, no general achieve his victory, no people attain its freedom without having first desired and striven for it in an unhis¬torical condition such as that described. As he who acts is, in Goethe’s words, always without a conscience, so is he also always without knowledge; he forgets most things so as to do one thing, he is unjust towards what lies behind him, and he recognizes the rights only of that which is now to come into being and no other rights whatever. Thus he who acts loves his deed infinitely more than it deserves to be loved: and the finest deeds take place in such a superabundance of love that, even if their worth were incalculable in other respects, they must still be unworthy of this love.

The generator of history is a deluded state of obsession that is not necessarily unjust but orthogonal to justice because it simply manifests its being without thinking. This wisdom is foundational to synthesis because: “it enables us to recognize how unaware even the greatest and highest spirits of our human race have been of the chance nature of the form assumed by the eyes through which they see and through which they compel everyone to see — compel, that is, because the intensity of their consciousness is exceptionally great. He who has not grasped this quite definitely and in many instances will be sub¬jugated by the appearance of a powerful spirit who brings to a given form the most impassioned commitment”. The historical man who does not grasp this wisdom is subjugated in awe by great characters — the Napoleons and the Cesars — of history. They reason that the only valid explanation for their greatness must be from some unexplainable “powerful spirit”. How is the historical man supposed to synthesize when his history is driven by mythical figures whose source of power is ineffable? The suprahistorical man knows better: the only reason they are able to compel is because of “the intensity of their consciousness”, how unhistoric they are. And even this disposition is created by “chance”. These great figures become demythologized. History, from the lens of the suprahistoric, is no longer populated by a set of mythical figures, but rather by forces and laws which, by chance, produce these great figures that propel it forward. Through this wisdom, the suprahistorical man “would, indeed, be cured forever of taking history too seriously”. It is this disrespect for history, as the historical man worships it, that enables the suprahistorical man to synthesize, to draw parallels and comparisons between great figures and events that would have seemed both nonsensical and blasphemous to the historical man. The suprahistorical is that which leads “the eye away from becoming[, the domain of the historical man,] towards that which bestows upon existence the character of the eternal and stable, towards art and religion”.

By demythologizing history, the suprahistorical is free to examine it and inquire into the most foundational forces within it. It is naturally drawn to synthesize, to see sameness where the historical man sees difference. “The past and the present are one, that is to say, with all their diversity identical in all that is typical and, as the omnipresence of imperishable types, a motionless structure of a value that cannot alter and a significance that is always the same. Just as the hundreds of different languages correspond to the same typically unchanging needs of man, so that he who understood these needs would be unable to learn anything new from any of these languages, so the suprahistorical thinker beholds the history of nations and of individuals from within, clairvoyantly divining the original meaning of the various hieroglyphics and gradually even coming wearily to avoid the endless stream of new signs: for how should the unending superfluity of events not reduce him to satiety, over-satiety and finally to nausea”!
Herein lies the danger of the suprahistorical. If synthesis is overdone, if one sees sameness in too much, wisdom turns to nausea through the hubris that one has seen everything under the sun. Pushed to its extreme: “the viewer from this vantage point could no longer feel any temptation to go on living or to take part in his¬tory”. Thus, the unhistorical capacity of action must restrain the suprahistorical capacity of synthesis to produce strong plastic powers, just as the unhistorical capacity of forgetting must limit the historical capacity of remembering for an optimal horizon.

Any healthy organism requires strong plastic powers and an optimal horizon. Nietzsche’s Germany has neither because of its fixation on the historic. The historic drive corrupts the unhistoric force of life and because of this corrupts itself since good history can only manifest by the interpretation of a great figure, from he who is full of life. “For when [the historic force] attains a certain degree of excess, life crumbles and degenerates, and through this degeneration history itself finally degenerates too”. Furthermore, without the unhistoric force of life to balance the suprahistorical force, the latter becomes more and more nauseated.

We must proceed through a discussion of the utility of history for life before we can discuss how it can be harmful to life: “That life is in need of the services of history, however, must be grasped as firmly as must the proposition, which is to be demonstrated later, that an excess of history is harmful to the living man.“

(https://johnathanbi.com/book-notes-summaries/the-uses-and-abuses-of-history-for-life)


==Three Uses of History==

History is useful to man in three ways, and we must understand these uses as conditional lest they manifest disastrous effects.
Each of the three species of history which exist belongs to a certain soil and a certain climate and only to that: in any other it grows into a devastating weed. If the man who wants to do something great has need of the past at all, he appropriates it by means of monumental history; he, on the other hand, who likes to persist in the familiar and the revered of old, tends the past as an antiquarian historian; and only he who is oppressed by a present need, and who wants to throw off this burden at any cost, has need of critical history, that is to say a history that judges and condemns. Much mischief is caused through the thoughtless transplantation of these plants: the critic without need, the antiquary without piety, the man who recognizes greatness but cannot himself do great things, are such plants, estranged from their mother soil and degenerated into weeds.


===Monumental history===

Monumental history is for “the man of deeds and power, [for] him who fights a great fight, who needs models, teachers, comforters and cannot find them among his contemporaries”. His goal is not his own flourishing but the flourishing of a nation or mankind as a whole. There is a deep optimism and belief in the human condition as he views history as an epic landscape connected by the peaks of great figures. Because he thinks in terms of continuation and lineage he can only be motivated by that which is lasting: fame.
Mostly there is no reward beckoning him on, unless it be fame, that is, the expectation of a place of honour in the temple of history, where he in turn can be a teacher, comforter and admonisher to those who come after him. For the commandment which rules over him is: that which in the past was able to expand the concept ‘man’ and make it more beautiful must exist everlastingly, so as to be able to accomplish this everlastingly. That the great moments in the struggle of the human individual constitute a chain, that this chain unites mankind across the millennia like a range of human mountain peaks, that the summit of such a long-ago moment shall be for me still living, bright and great — that is the fundamental idea of the faith in humanity which finds expression in the demand for a monumental history.
The motivation from monumental history comes from the fact that it shows what has been done:
Supposing someone believed that it would require no more than a hundred men educated and actively working in a new spirit to do away with the bogus form of culture which has just now become the fashion in Germany, how greatly it would strengthen him to realize that the culture of the Renaissance was raised on the shoulders of just such a band of a hundred men.

And motivate it must in order to counter the immense resistance met on the monumental path, a path that “leads through human brains“. Other than the man of power and deeds, “everything else that lives cries No. The monumental shall not come into existence — that is the counter-word. Apathetic habit, all that is base and petty, filling every corner of the earth and billowing up around all that is great like a heavy breath of the earth, casts itself across the path that greatness has to tread on its way to immortality and retards, deceives, suffocates and stifles it”.

The contributions of monumental history lie in this ability motivate: it shows that the past is worthy of imitation and that it is possible to be imitated and repeated. To do this it must simplify or ignore the causes altogether and paint history as a series of effects in themselves. This makes the past worthy of imitation because it highlights the great deeds and not the, perhaps less than epic conditions, that created them. This makes the past possible to imitate because it covers the immense set of conditions outside an actor’s control that was necessary for these deeds to come to be.

It will always have to deal in approximations and generalities, in making what is dissimilar look similar; it will always have to diminish the dif¬ferences of motives and instigations so as to exhibit the effectus monumentally, that is to say as something exemplary and worthy of imitation, at the expense of the causae: so that, since it as far as possible ignores causes, one might with only slight exaggeration call it a collection of effects in themselves’, of events which will produce an effect upon all future ages.
“Monumental history deceives by analogies: with seductive similarities it inspires the courageous to foolhardiness and the inspired to fanaticism”. By removing the varied causes and conditions of the past, it inspires through deception. 

Thus, it is dangerous if this mode of history is not being balanced out by the other two:

As long as the soul of historiography lies in the great stimuli that a man of power derives from it, as long as the past has to be described as worthy of imitation, as imitable and possible for a second time, it of course incurs the danger of becoming somewhat distorted, beautified and coming close to free poetic invention; there have been ages, indeed, which were quite incapable of distinguishing be¬ tween a monumentalized past and a mythical fiction, because pre¬cisely the same stimuli can be derived from the one world as from the other … If, therefore, the monumental mode of regarding history rules over the other modes — I mean over the antiquarian and critical — the past itself suffers harm: whole segments of it are forgotten, des¬pised, and flow away in an uninterrupted colourless flood, and only individual embellished facts rise out of it like islands: the few personalities who are visible at all have something strange and unnatural about them, like the golden hip which the pupils of Pythagoras supposed they saw on their master.

Furthermore, monumental history is devastating not only at the hands of the powerful, as a tool for continued bloodshed and conquest, but it can be even dangerous at the hands of the weak. Out of resentment, the weak turn past monuments into a canon which suppresses current greatness:

- For they do not desire to see new greatness emerge: their means of preventing it is to say ‘Behold, greatness already exists!’ In reality, they are as little concerned about this greatness that already exists as they are about that which is emerging: their lives are evidence of this. Monumental history is the masquerade costume in which their hatred of the great and powerful of their own age is disguised as satiated admiration for the great and powerful of past ages, and muflled in which they invert the real meaning of that mode of regarding history into its opposite; whether they are aware of it or not, they act as though their motto were: let the dead bury the living.


===Antiquarian history===

Antiquarian history is for the man who, unlike the monumental, looks back with a sense of piety towards the past that is rooted from a respect of the present. It serves life in two ways. First, it preserves that which is good from antiquity, it perpetuates the desirable conditions under which one grew up. Second, it makes people feel justified in their existence: “the contentment of the tree in its roots, the happiness of knowing that one is not wholly accidental and arbitrary but grown out of a past as its heir, flower and fruit, and that one’s existence is thus excused and, indeed, justified — it is this which is today usually designated as the real sense of history”.

To accomplish this, history must again be distorted. In fact, regardless of the type of history, “as long as the study of history serves life and is directed by the vital drives, the past itself suffers”. One’s field of view must be narrowed to significant moments in one’s lineage, and even that is presented in isolation without context. 


It becomes blindly praised simply because it is “us” with no standard with which we can judge or measure:

- The antiquarian sense of a man, a community, a whole people, always possesses an extremely restricted field of vision; most of what exists it does not perceive at all, and the little it does see it sees much too close up and isolated; it cannot relate what it sees to anything else and it therefore accords everything it sees equal importance and therefore to each individual thing too great importance. There is a lack of that discrimination of value and that sense of proportion which would distinguish between the things of the past in a way that would do true justice to them; their measure and proportion is always that accorded them by the backward glance of the antiquarian nation or individual. This always produces one very imminent danger: everything old and past that enters one’s field of vision at all is in the end blandly taken to be equally worthy of reverence, while everything that does not approach this antiquity with reverence, that is to say everything new and evolving, is rejected and persecuted. Thus even the Greeks tolerated the hieratic style in their plastic arts beside the free and great; later, indeed, they did not merely tolerate the elevated nose and the frosty smile but even made a cult of it. When the senses of a people harden in this fashion, when the study of history serves the life of the past in such a way that it undermines continuing and especially higher life, when the historical sense no longer conserves life but mummifies it, then the tree gradually dies unnaturally from the top downwards to the roots — and in the end the roots themselves usually perish too. Antiquarian history itself degenerates from the moment it is no longer animated and inspired by the fresh life of the present. Its piety withers away, the habit of scholarliness continues without it and rotates in egoistic self-satisfaction around its own axis
Nietzsche suggests that the natural quality of antiquarian history to idolize the past without qualification is dangerous because it provides us with no standards of discrimination. The sole measure of value becomes age, and this is antithetical to any form of creation. Once Antiquarian history descends into this past-worship, life itself suffers and along with it. Antiquarian history suffers because there is no longer any vibrancy or hope in the present that is worth justifying. The tree dies unnaturally from the branches. Even when Antiquarian history does not degenerate as such, is still dangerous to life: “for it knows only how to preserve life, not how to engender it; it always undervalues that which is becoming because it has no instinct for divining it — as monumental history, for example, has. Thus it hinders any firm resolve to attempt something new, thus it paralyses the man of action who, as one who acts, will and must often some piety or other."


===Critical History===

Critical history is for the man who is oppressed by current conditions and seeks a radical breakaway. He judges the past by bringing it to the tribunal and expelling it. “It is not justice which here sits in judgment; it is even less mercy which pronounces the verdict: it is life alone, that dark, driving power that insatiably thirsts for itself. Its sentence is always unmerciful, always unjust, because it has never proceeded out of a pure well of knowledge; but in most cases the sentence would be the same even if it were pronounced by justice itself”. Because it is the unhistoric, the unjust that creates history, all history would be rejected if under the judgement of justice much less the less impartial judgement of life.

In the stead of this rejected history, we impart another disposition and behavior, as if we had originated from a better more just story:

- The best we can do is to confront our inherited and hereditary nature with our knowledge, and through a new, stern discipline combat our inborn heritage and implant in ourselves a new habit, a new instinct, a second nature, so that our first nature withers away. It is an attempt to give oneself, as it were a posteriori, a past in which one would like to originate in opposition to that in which one did originate: — always a dangerous attempt because it is so hard to know the limit to denial of the past and because second natures are usually weaker than first.

The danger of this type of history is obvious: we reject too much, our replacements are worse, or we are unable to break away altogether.”

(https://johnathanbi.com/book-notes-summaries/the-uses-and-abuses-of-history-for-life)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Books]]