
'''Article: Using Emergence to Take Social Innovations to Scale. By Margaret Wheatley & Deborah Frieze, 2006'''

URL = http://leadershiplearning.org/system/files/Using%20emergence%20to%20take%20social%20innovations%20to%20scale_0.pdf

Proposes a three-stage theory to get to 'systems of influence' that can change the world.


=Introduction=

"Despite current ads and slogans, the world doesn’t change one person at
a time. It changes as networks of relationships form among people who discover
they share a common cause and vision of what’s possible. This is good news for
those of us intent on changing the world and creating a positive future. Rather
than worry about critical mass, our work is to foster critical connections. We
don’t need to convince large numbers of people to change; instead, we need to
connect with kindred spirits. Through these relationships, we will develop the
new knowledge, practices, courage, and commitment that lead to broad-based
change.

But networks aren’t the whole story. As networks grow and transform into
active, working communities of practice, we discover how Life truly changes,
which is through emergence. When separate, local efforts connect with each
other as networks, then strengthen as communities of practice, suddenly and
surprisingly a new system emerges at a greater level of scale. This system of
influence possesses qualities and capacities that were unknown in the
individuals. It isn’t that they were hidden; they simply don’t exist until the system
emerges. They are properties of the system, not the individual, but once there,
individuals possess them. And the system that emerges always possesses
greater power and influence than is possible through planned, incremental
change. Emergence is how Life creates radical change and takes things to scale."
([http://leadershiplearning.org/system/files/Using%20emergence%20to%20take%20social%20innovations%20to%20scale_0.pdf])


=Excerpt=

==The Lifecycle of Emergence==

Stage One: Networks. 

We live in a time when coalitions, alliances and
networks are forming as the means to create societal change. There are ever more
networks and now, networks of
networks. These networks are
essential for people finding likeminded
others, the first stage in the
lifecycle of emergence. It’s
important to note that networks are
only the beginning. They are based
on self-interest--people usually
network together for their own
benefit and to develop their own work. Networks tend to have fluid membership;
people move in and out of them based on how much they personally benefit from participating.


'''Stage Two: Communities of Practice.''' 

Networks make it possible for people
to find others engaged in similar work. The second stage of emergence is the
development of communities of practice (CoPs). Many such smaller, individuated
communities can spring from a robust network. CoPs are also self-organized.
People share a common work and realize there is great benefit to being in
relationship. They use this community to share what they know, to support one
another, and to intentionally create
new knowledge for their field of
practice. These CoPs differ from
networks in significant ways. They
are communities, which means that
people make a commitment to be
there for each other; they participate
not only for their own needs, but to
serve the needs of others.
In a community of practice, the focus extends beyond the needs of the group.
There is an intentional commitment to advance the field of practice, and to share
those discoveries with a wider audience. They make their resources and knowledge
available to anyone, especially those doing related work.
The speed with which people learn and grow in a community of practice is
noteworthy. Good ideas move rapidly amongst members. New knowledge and
practices are implemented quickly. The speed at which knowledge development
and exchange happens is crucial, because local regions and the world need this
knowledge and wisdom now.


'''Stage Three: Systems of Influence.''' 

The third stage in emergence can
never be predicted. It is the sudden appearance of a system that has real power
and influence. Pioneering efforts that hovered at the periphery suddenly become
the norm. The practices developed by courageous communities become the
accepted standard. People no longer hesitate about adopting these approaches
and methods and they learn them easily. Policy and funding debates now include
the perspectives and experiences of
these pioneers. They become leaders
in the field and are acknowledged as
the wisdom keepers for their particular
issue. And critics who said it could
never be done suddenly become chief
supporters (often saying they knew it all
along.)

Emergence is the fundamental
scientific explanation for how local changes can materialize as global systems of
influence. As a change theory, it offers methods and practices to accomplish the
systems-wide changes that are so needed at this time. As leaders and
communities of concerned people, we need to intentionally work with emergence so
that our efforts will result in a truly hopeful future. No matter what other change
strategies we have learned or favored, emergence is the only way change really
happens on this planet. And that is very good news."
([http://leadershiplearning.org/system/files/Using%20emergence%20to%20take%20social%20innovations%20to%20scale_0.pdf])


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Articles]]