
'''* Article: The Ring of Gyges: Using Smart Contracts for Crime. By Ari Juels, Ahmed Kosba et al.'''

URL = http://www.arijuels.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/Gyges.pdf


=Contextual Citation=

Via [http://www.arijuels.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/Gyges.pdf]:

* "The Ring of Gyges is a mythical magical artifact
mentioned by the philosopher Plato in Book 2 of
his Republic. It granted its owner the power to
become invisible at will." (–Wikipedia, “Ring of Gyges”)

* “[On wearing the ring,] no man would keep his
hands off what was not his own when he could
safely take what he liked out of the market, or go
into houses and lie with anyone at his pleasure, or
kill or release from prison whom he would, and
in all respects be like a God among men.”
–Plato, The Republic, Book 2 (2.360b) (trans. Benjamin
Jowett)


=Abstract=

"Thanks to their anonymity (pseudonymity) and lack
of trusted intermediaries, cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin
have created or stimulated growth in many businesses and
communities. Unfortunately, some are criminal, e.g., money
laundering, marketplaces for illicit goods, and ransomware.
Next-generation cryptocurrencies such as Ethereum will
include rich scripting languages in support of smart contracts,
programs that autonomously intermediate transactions. We
illuminate the extent to which these new cryptocurrencies,
by enabling criminal activities to be conducted anonymously
and with minimal trust assumptions, may fuel new criminal
ecosystems. Specifically, we show how what we call criminal
smart contracts (CSCs) can facilitate leakage of confidential
information, theft of cryptographic keys, and various realworld
crimes (murder, arson, terrorism).

We show significantly that CSCs for leakage of secrets
are efficiently realizable in existing scripting languages such
as that in Ethereum. We show that CSCs for key theft can
be achieved using cryptographic primitives, such as Succinct
Non-interactive ARguments of Knowledge (SNARKs), that
are already expressible in these languages and for which
efficient supporting language extensions are anticipated. We
demonstrate similarly that authenticated data feeds, another
anticipated feature of smart contract systems, can facilitate
CSCs for real-world crimes.

Our results illuminate the scope of possible abuses in nextgeneration
cryptocurrencies. They highlight the urgency of
creating policy and technical safeguards and thereby realizing
the great promise of smart contracts for beneficial goals."

[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger Applications]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Security]]