

=Discussion=

Shann Turnbull:

"The idea of using the environment to define economic value has appeal for a number of reasons. First, life cannot exist without environmental services. Second, environmental services would avoid the value of money being manipulated by governments, central bankers, trade between countries, speculation in currencies and other economic and human activities. Third, and most importantly, the use of local environmental services to determine economic values, prices and costs would then determine how market forces operate. This would create a powerful way for nature to provide feedback to humanity to sustain both together.

There are many ways of anchoring economic values to the services of nature. A number of ways could be used together to create competition between various currencies. These matters and the choice of service are considered in my other writings. For simplicity only the retail value of electricity generated from benign sustainable resources is considered here. Units of value determined in this way will be referred to as Sustainable Energy Dollars (SEDs=$Z).

The value of $Z would vary around the world according to how well nature endowed the host environment with renewable energy. Economic values, prices and costs in each bioregion would accordingly be different. Market forces would then emerge to distribute the population of the world according to the carrying capacity of each region of the planet to sustain humanity."
(http://www.ethicalmarkets.com/2013/01/14/can-democratic-money-with-environmental-values-reduce-market-failures/)


[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Articles]]