
=Characteristics=

Samuel Blanch:

“The differentiated university

The university operates on the basis of such differentiation, seen most clearly in its structures of accountability and in documents informing current policy direction. Let me explore here three such structures.

'''The first is specialisation'''. Indeed, the university is now so synonymous with unceasing specialisation that the novelty of this fact goes unnoticed. Doctoral students are forever told to narrow down their field of inquiry, to choose a discipline. The new Excellence in Research for Australia (ERA) exercise requires academics to designate their specialisation. So I am forced to decide whether my research falls within "Anthropology" or "Religious Studies"? Is it "Philosophy" or "Other philosophy and Religious Studies"? This is not just nomenclature. That much sought after grant application, which will determine whether an academic can actually conduct some of her own research beyond her teaching responsibilities, will either be assessed by someone from religious studies who may consider the close anthropological lens poor methodology, or by the philosopher who thinks that on the topic of religion no more can be said.

'''The academic will also be monitored for their utility'''. Entrenching what has been government's rhetorical rule for decades, we now have the Engagement and Impact Assessment. Of course, this system of accountability contains some flexibility. And, of course, one might conceivably find ways to describe the impact of a study of, say, the ethics of Thomas Aquinas or Mulla Sadra Shirazi. But the incentive structures are clear, and the consequence is not favourable for the great books. The easy money for the Islamic studies specialist will be the problem of terrorism. The easy money for the political scientist will be predicting the rational choices of voters.

'''Demand-driven choice is now the mantra of the university'''. And upon giving students choice, as Stephen McInerney of the Ramsay Centre himself has pointed out, we ought not to be surprised that they choose not to read great books.”

(https://www.abc.net.au/religion/why-the-ramsay-centre-doesnt-fit-in-the-modern-university/10214318 )

[[Category:Education]]