

=Description=

Neil Farnan:

"Utopoly is both a tool for utopian practice and a fun game. It draws on Robert Jungk's Future Workshop methodology to re-engage people's imagination and ideas for a better society and incorporates the results into a 'hack' of Monopoly.

Elizabeth Magie's original game (1904) was intended to show how landlords accumulate wealth and impoverish society. Players could choose either a winner takes all scenario or one where wealth was distributed evenly via a land tax. Magie also hoped that children's sense of fairness meant they would choose the latter and apply these ideas in adulthood. But the Monopoly we have today normalises and celebrates competitive land grabbing and rentier behaviour and Magie was airbrushed out of history and replaced with a more acceptable mythology of the American Dream.

Whilst Magie's game informed players about the current situation, Utopoly gives people the opportunity to imagine and incorporate values and attributes they would want in a more utopian world. Players are able to determine the properties, the chance and community cards and even rules of the game. The rules being determined by the players means the game is a work-in-progress, however some features that work well can get adopted and carried through to the next iteration."
(http://www.furtherfield.org/features/interviews/utopoly-playing-tool-reimagine-our-future-interview-neil-farnan)


=History=

"Critical Practice, a research cluster at Chelsea College of Arts, played a central role. We were concurrently developing both Utopoly and an event #TransActing – A Market of Values, and the current version of Utopoly is a synergy of aspects of these two projects. The first 'hack' of Monopoly occurred at Utopographies, co-organised by Critical Practice (28th – 29th March 2014), where the elements of the game were redesigned to incorporate utopian values. Inspired, we decided to continue developing the ideas and a second 'hack' took place (December 2014). Some of the ideas and values that emerged from this iteration fed into and were represented in the design of the currencies used for #TransActing. A further opportunity presented itself for another 'hack' within the research event 'What Happens to Us' at Wimbledon College of Art. This iteration was hosted by Neil Cummings and I was invited to include the currencies developed for #TransActing. It was here that Utopoly as a 'method' began to emerge, a method for collectively producing possible futures. I have since convened a number of iterations using a large laminated board to facilitate design adaptations and ease of play.

Additionally, researchers from the international ValueModels project (modelling evaluative communities utilising blockchain technology) recently visited Chelsea - we played Utopoly and they loved the method. They have since been inspired to use Utopoly in their research, and I'm excited to receive their feedback on how their version develops."
(http://www.furtherfield.org/features/interviews/utopoly-playing-tool-reimagine-our-future-interview-neil-farnan)


=Source=

From a Furtherfield interview undertaken by By Francesca Baglietto, 26/04/2017

URL = http://www.furtherfield.org/features/interviews/utopoly-playing-tool-reimagine-our-future-interview-neil-farnan



[[Category:Gaming]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Politics]]