= also called the 'Fent Cooperatives Plan'


=Description=

Ilcheong Yi, Fulvia Farinelli,band Raymond Landveld:

"Spain was the first country in Europe to pass a Social
Economy Law (2011) and one of the first to approve a
national government strategy for SSEOEs. Moreover,
following the regional and local elections of 2015, many
sub-national governments promoted new generation of
policies to foster the Social Economy particularly the local
government in Valencia. 

In 2015, a coalition of left-wing political parties took
office in the region of Valencia and signed a global
agreement for socio-economic transformation, “l’Acord del
Botànic” which included a medium-term strategic plan for
the transformation of the Valencian economy structured
along 10 strategic areas including “Promoting the creation of
sustainable employment and social economy” (area 5). 

With the widespread political consensus, in October
2017, the Valencian Cooperativism Council (Consejo
Valenciano de Cooperativismo), made up of the Consell and
the Confederació de Cooperatives, approved the 1st Biennial
Plan to Support and Promote Valencian Cooperativism
(2018–2019), called ‘Fent Cooperatives’.

This particular policy was designed to support Cooperatives
across Valencia and was aligned with national and multinational public policies, such as the Europe 2020 Strategy,
the rural development plan, the Valencian Territorial Strategy,
and the Valencian Entrepreneurship Plan.

=Policy=

"The strategic goals of the ‘Fent Cooperatives’ Plan is
to improve the competitiveness of Valencian cooperatives
across four areas which are:

1. Achieving social, economic, and environmental sustainability.

2. Increasing stable and quality employment.

3. Making progress towards equal
representation of women and young people
in corporate responsibility areas.

4. Extending the values and principles of the cooperative
model to the rest of the Valencian business fabric.

Furthermore, the strategic plan also specifies the Body
responsible for the implementation of each initiative and the
budgetary amount allocated, which also includes a strategy
for monitoring and assessing results, with an evaluation after
two years."

(https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/social_and_solidarity_economy_29_march_2023.pdf)

[[Category:Cooperatives]]
[[Category:Spain]]
[[Category:Commons_Policy]]