 

'''* The [[Valocracy Manifesto]]. Rafael Castaneda. Castacrypto, 2023''' 

URL = https://castacrypto.notion.site/Valocracy-Manifesto-f1ca6d59fad54ab9a8aa15924026a05f

=Description=

Excerpt:

"Valocracy is initially thought to leverage digital communities that want to be economically sustainable. In particular, communities that are sprawling within the Web 3 movement, as several of these communities comprise people that are dissatisfied with traditional economic, social, and political arrangements and that are migrating to Web 3 in search not only for a breath of fresh air but also to engage in economic activities and to make a living out of it.

Born out of this realization, Valocracy is a system that aims to economically incentivize individuals to generate true value for their organizations and for themselves, all while being free to choose between one or several organizations and the activities that better fit their life ambitions.

One may argue that this is true today, and that the stories of self-made millionaires are proof that entrepreneurs who generate value with great products and services are made rich as retribution for their fair contribution to society.

And indeed, it is, but only to some extent.

The fact is that once individuals and companies are rich enough, it becomes cheaper to use their accumulated wealth to bend the system in their favor rather than to further improve society via a fair contribution. This results in the inevitable and ever-widening gap between the ultra-rich and the masses, or shareholders and laborers.

By attempting to learn from history, Valocracy was designed to operate in such a manner that “purchasing power” does not easily translate into “political power”, and that individuals are incentivized to constantly generate value, being rewarded by their capacity to contribute to the collective rather than by their capacity to extract from the collective."


=Principles=

Raphael Castaneda:

"In order to achieve that, our framework has several design principles.

== #1 Principle: Human Effort is not Fungible ==

In our current model of work relations, effort is employed in exchange for money. The exchange of money for effort settles the contribution and most individual effort is then forgotten and becomes fungible. 

It also becomes corporate property, owned by the shareholders of the company and eligible to be leveraged in order to generate profits that may be orders of magnitude greater than the initial and individual exchange itself.

In Valocracy, we propose that human effort is not fungible and that it should not be exchanged directly for money, but rather through an intermediate layer that “tokenizes the individual effort contributed to the collective”.

In Valocracy, those who perform an effort for any collective are granted a NFT from the collective that states and preserves the non-fungible aspects of the effort.

This is the first step towards building Valocracy: the tokenization of an asset that so far has not been completely materialized and appreciated, the “effort put forth by an individual for a collective”. 

So instead of saying that an individual effort is worth X fiat currency or Y tokens, we first state and register that the effort took place, along with the characteristics that make this effort unique.

It may seem that we are only bringing task management on-chain, but an effort here may include several tasks, and it is not meant to be applied at the micro-management level.

What we are trying to do is give acknowledgment and ownership of the effort to the ones who actually perform it.

As such, individual effort then becomes an asset that is the **property of the performer**.

As we are still working on an intermediate layer, the asset by itself has no absolute value or precification; it merely states the share of the current contribution within the whole effort put forth by the collective. The absolute value in terms of purchasing power or political power then has to be dynamically derived from the whole and not be pre-fixed.

In result, as a collective evolves and changes, so should the economic and political relevance of their individuals.

== #2 Principle: Split Economic and Governance Power==

Every effort employed shall entitle the performer with a share of economic power and governance power within the collective. Both are independent from each other, being two separate sub-assets contained within the effort asset.

- **Tokenized Governance Power (TGP):** Gives the performer of the effort governance rights, to vote and propose on community governance.

- **Tokenized Economic Power (TEP):** Gives the performer of the effort a share of the community treasury, which may be claimed whenever the performer sees fit.

If we aim to better separate “economic power” from “political power”, then the first step is to tokenize those two assets as independent tokens. That allows us to subject those assets to differente rulesets, thus creating new, and more sophisticated, coordination incentives.

For instance, in Valocracy the Economic Power may be sold and negotiated at the secondary market, but Governance Power cannot, and it is meant to behave as a “soul-bound token”.


== #3 Principle: Isonomy > Equality — “Don’t Fight Pareto” ==

The Pareto Principle states that 80% of any outcome comes from 20% of the effort put to it.

If we reflect this to collectives then, at large, 80% of the collective outcome will be due to 20% if its individuals.

We assume this rule to be true and Valocracy is designed to accommodate it. So, a valocratic collective does not aim to enforce the concept of equality/equity by completely eliminating social or wealth disparities among members of a collective.

Instead, Valocracy emphasizes the principle of **isonomy**: ensuring that the same set of rules is applied consistently to all members of a collective, regardless of their economic status or governance influence.

As such, individuals who contribute with more effort shall be rewarded more governance and economic power within the collective, but all contributors shall agree to the same rewarding and contributing mechanism.

Also, for that to work, not every effort can be considered equally important, as some efforts require more work and a scarcer skill set, which means that different efforts can aggregate more or less value, or even be more or less critical to the collective.

The obvious answer to this problem would be that “the more important the effort, the more political and economic power it should be rewarded”. 

And the tricky part is, “by how much”?

If we set up some kind of fiduciary auctioning system or fixed-reward over a common treasury, then we are once again giving fungible aspects to the effort all while attempting to settle on how much fungible fiat coins or tokens the effort is worth.

Valocracy instead proposes the application of a “rarity” system to the Tokenized Effort, a subjective evaluation rather than a quantitative one, where the “rarity” of each NFT adds to its weight on the participation of the collective Governance and Treasury.

Each collective is free to define how they want to ponder the rarities and/or define their own categories. For instance, one community could use a Fibonacci or a Power of Two rule to ponder the weight of each rarity:

As such, the sum of all the Tokenized Governance Power of an individual over the total Tokenized Governance Power of the collective represents this individual vote weight. In the same way, the sum of all the Tokenized Economic Power of an individual over the total Tokenized Economic Power of the collective represents this individual share of the treasury.

Which means, that although we do not fix specifically fiduciary returns for any specific effort, we are able to fix the individual’s share of the whole fiduciary result. In such a system, if the individuals collaborate to a great collective, then they get their specific share of a great result, or in the reverse situation, they all share their specific burden and prejudice of failure.

The greater the individual relevance to the collective, the greater is their share of collective gains and losses.


== #4 Principle: Farewell “Shareholder”… long live “Valueholder” ==

Joint-stock companies, as collectives that engage in economic activity, are to a large extent a reflection of modern society. They have their own private elite, as shareholders, and their own private masses, as laborers. 

The potential for joint-stock companies and the figure of shareholders was first popularized with the creation of the East India Company, in the 1600s. 

In those times, the venture of overseas trading was extremely costly and dangerous. So, in order to mitigate those risks, the company introduced the sale of shares that allowed them to raise capital and distribute the risks associated with the venture among a large number of shareholders. 

The principle was very straightforward: if the venture succeeds, shareholders get a share of the profits, and if the venture fails, then they all share the prejudice.

While such essence remains true to this very day, the dynamics over shareholder interest have evolved. Over time, shareholders understood that there’s more to  gain in elevating stock prices rather than actually fostering profitable and sustainable ventures.

This shift in focus led to the formation of a new market, in which “stock price” often becomes the primary metric of success, even if it comes at the expense of broader social and economic considerations, or even at the expense of the long-term goals and sustainablity of the venture.

A blunt manifestation of this trend was the phenomenon of “mega-corporate buy-backs” during the quantitative easing (QE) policies of the post-2008 USA, where companies would rather borrow to buy back their own stocks than to improve competitiveness and working conditions to join the overall campaign for social and economic recovery.

In simple terms, at some point shareholders are no longer incentivized to add true value to their collectives and the individuals that comprise it, but rather to artificially inflate the stock-price value. 

As a response to these challenges, Valocracy aims to blur the distinction between shareholders and laborers (or stocks vs salaries) by introducing the concept of “Value Holder”. 

A “Value Holder” of a collective is anyone who possesses a share of “Tokenized Economic Power” within that collective.

There are two means to become a Valueholder:

1. **Effort-Based Acquisition:** Individuals who contribute effort to a collective receive “Tokenized Effort” which encapsulates “Tokenized Economic Power”

2. **Secondary Market:** Since “Tokenized Economic Power” is not a soul-bound token, it can be sold on the market by those who originally contributed effort to the community.

It is important to understand that “Tokenized Economic Power” represents a claimable share in the collective treasury. A Valueholder can, at any time, burn their “Tokenized Economic Power” to claim their fiduciary/fungible share of the treasury. 

So, while “Tokenized Economic Power” behaves as a “stock” in the sense that it denotes a share of collective profits, it also remains grounded in reality, because it is pegged to the current wealth of the treasury. As a tangible share of a real treasury that can be claimed at any time, each and every “Tokenized Economic Power” always has an intrinsic and “guaranteed floor value”.

This dual functionality means it can also serve as a “salary” if the original contributor decides to regularly claim their earned shares via the burning of the “Tokenized Economy Power” instead of selling or holding it. 

Thus, the “Valueholder” concept blurs the distinction between shareholders and laborers, offering individual freedom to decide when to act as a paid laborer and when to act as a shareholder, or even to do both at the same time with different parcels of their earned “Tokenized Economic Power”.

It also allows foreign individuals to take a stake in the treasury by acquiring “Tokenized Economic Power” in the secondary market if they believe their bought shares are to be worth more in the future. In that sense, Valueholders can sell their “Tokenized Economic Power” on the secondary market for more than the guaranteed floor price, as an “advance against receivables”.


== #5 Principle: Incentivize Efficiency ==

In Valocracy, if we take the Treasury over the Collective Effort put together by individuals over time, we can derive “Collective Efficiency” as a metric.

 CollectiveEfficiency = \frac{Treasury}{CollectiveEffort}


As both Treasury and Collective Effort are subject to changes over time, so is the derived Efficiency.

If a collective treasury grows at a higher rate than the collective effort, it means that individual effort is being put to good use, it is efficient. And, as such, individuals are further incentivized not only to hold their treasury shares but also to further collaborate and increase their stake in the collective. 

This “holding” mentality is not meant to reflect the goal of flipping assets that have no tangible value by themselves (i.e. true floor price) but to reflect that individuals may prefer to be “shareholders” than “employees” if they are engaging in prosperous collectives.

In this sense, Valocratic collectives are subjected to efficiency. They need to be efficient, or else individuals will be incentivized to not only sell their shares but to also stop putting effort into the collective altogether. 

This may seem harsh, but we must recall that Valocracy is thought for collectives that want not only to do things differently but also to engage in economic activities and to survive in the real world.


== #6 Principle: Time in the Collective > Timing the Collective ==

As collectives get bigger and (ideally) wealthier, Governance becomes of more importance. 

The separation of economic power and governance power aims to mitigate governance attacks, as governance power is soul-bound. It cannot be bought at market and must be earned from collaborative effort.

However, Valocracy aims to go even further and implement a governance effectiveness curve over each and every individual instance of Tokenized Governance Power, where effectiveness is null at birth, grows over time, and then decreases until it becomes null again.

Such measure aims to reinforce the governance power of individuals who consistently contribute effort, to the detriment of those who may have been great contributors of the past, but who have abandoned the collective, or even those who are newcomers and are still beginning to understand the collective, and as such lack enough experience to properly engage in governance. 

As a consequence of this measure, Valocracy governance is not static, it shifts dynamically giving more decision power to those who are contributing to the collective on a regular basis. 

It is important to note that Tokenized Economic Power is not subjected to this curve."

(https://castacrypto.notion.site/Valocracy-Manifesto-f1ca6d59fad54ab9a8aa15924026a05f)

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]
[[Category:P2P_Accounting]]
[[Category:Social_Charters]]