
'''= "VDP is a simple protocol that defines how value should be divided amongst various stakeholders".'''

URL = https://github.com/ktorn/vdp

The core element of the protocol is the VDP configuration file, which defines stakeholders and their relative value allocation.

=Example=

"Free/Libre Software (FLS) and Open Source Software (OSS) Funding

Many for-profit projects, especially software, depend on a variety of FLS/OSS projects. The creators of these businesses and projects know this, yet cannot identify who they should donate to, given the huge variety of projects and their contributors.

In this context VDP can be used to fairly distribute donations to the FLS/OSS stack. Each company simply needs to define their top-level stack, and link to the various projects' existing VDP files.

Each project will take care of maintaining their own VDP files, attributing credit to both sub-dependencies, as well as direct contributors.

In an ideal scenario, e-commerce sites can automatically donate small percentages of incoming sales, with each sale triggering a cascade of VDP payments resulting in automatic micropayments to the developers of the stack, who will benefit from a new recurring revenue stream."
(https://github.com/ktorn/vdp)

=More Information=

*  Implementations: http://subsatoshi.org - currently only contains the PoC code used at the hackathon.
TODOs:

* Previously known as: "Cascading Revenue Sharing Protocol" (CRSP) and "Value Chain Distribution Protocol" (VCDP)

* Value Distribution Protocol by Filipe Farinha is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]