

=Discussion=

Hegemonic vs community economies conception of value

Source:

'''* Article: Eskelinen, Teppo (2020). The conception of value in community economies. In Eskelinen, Teppo;
Hirvilammi, Tuuli; Venäläinen, Juhana (Eds.) Enacting Community Economies Within a Welfare
State. MayFly, 23-45.''' 

URL = http://mayflybooks.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ECEWAWS_final_ebook.pdf [https://jyx.jyu.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/68219/1/ECEWAWS_The-conception-of-value.pdf self-archived copy]


==The hegemonic value conception==

Teppo Eskelinen:

"The capitalist conception of economic value has gained a
hegemonic position. Because the hegemonic conception is rarely
articulated and more typically just embedded in practices as
a given, a criticism and search for alternatives should begin by
making the value conception explicit. While this could be done
by analysing the daily functioning of the capitalist society, there
is also an explicit value conception available: the one articulated
in economics. Contemporary mainstream economics is intimately
connected with capitalism. Furthermore, it carries major
epistemic power because this economics is the science for both
describing and reproducing the capitalist order: it is then a system
for reflecting, what capitalism sees as valuable.

The idea of value as it exists in contemporary economics is based
on two theories seen as mutually exclusive: the labour theory of
value and the subjective theory of value. More precisely, economics
can be seen as being grounded on the demand-based theory of
value, so that the justification narrative sees the labour theory of
value as the only existing (and conceivable) alternative to it. 


In other words, the conception of value in contemporary economies
is based on these two ideas: 

* first the dominance of the demandbased theory, and 
* second the belief that the theory of value needs
to be chosen from these two mutually exclusive alternatives.


Classical political economy, including Ricardo as well as Marx,
leaned on the labour theory of value (Theocarakis 2010). The
classical economists assumed a theoretical entry point, according
to which value refers to the amount of labour embodied in a
commodity, including historical labour needed to develop the
necessary physical capital. Ricardo formulated the theory as
follows: ‘The value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other
commodity for which it will exchange, depends on the relative
quantity of labour which is necessary for its production, and not
on the greater or less compensation which is paid for that labour‘
(Ricardo 1817). ‘Labour‘ is thus a very general term for categorising
human productive activity appearing in several societal and
historical contexts (Mandel 1990). Furthermore, it is seen as a
commensurable substance, which allows the comparability of
completely different kinds of goods.

The labour theory of value has been criticised for being ambiguous
about the relation between value and price (generally on the
subject, see González 2013), or even as metaphysical (Robinson
1962). Yet the most influential criticism focuses on the tendency
of labour theory of value to ignore the subjective valuations of
market agents, in other words demand. This criticism gave rise
to the marginalist school of thought and the subjective theory of
value that forms the basis of neoclassical economics. According to
this theory, the economic value of a given good is determined by 
the interplay between subjective valuations of goods (expressed
though market demand) and the scarcity of these goods. Thus,
the value of a given good cannot be objective and constant, like
the labour theory of value suggests, but depends on the will of
consumers to pay for the good.

The subjective theory of value tends to reduce all theorising on
value into market transactions, in which the expressed valuations of
atomistic market subjects are decisive. The theory ignores the value
of things external to market goods as well as non-commodified
goods, as it assumes that valuation has to be expressed within
the market, if (economic) value is to exist. Indeed, the social
aspect of the economy or value that the theory recognises is the
existence of instrumental market relations: people might engage
in exchange and contracts as they observe temporary mutual gain.
Furthermore, value is seen to be consumed in the instance of
transaction: whatever happens to the object after the transaction
is a personal issue and beyond the scope of value theory.

On a quick look, the existing value conception, or more precisely
the paradigm describing these as mutually exclusive alternatives,
might sound sensible. Therefore, a critical look needs to be taken
on the particular weaknesses within this conception.
Both labour and subjective theory of value state, that value can be
detached from the social basis which enables its production. This
has a dual implication: firstly, no social patterns of care, upbringing
or such, are recognised as valuable; and secondly, the social process
in which economic goods are exchanged, is seen as meaningless
from the perspective of determination of value. Moreover, no
notion of power is incorporated in the value conception, therefore
casting the hierarchies in economic processes or their unmaking
as insignificant.

Additionally, the subjective theory of value functions effectively
as a justification for capitalist practices, particularly because
of what it omits. Two issues in this regard stand out. First off,
the subjective theory of value leans on an idea of well-being, 
according to which well-being is always enhanced when more
market preferences are met, thus forming the basis of seeing the
limitless growth of consumption as a well-being endeavor means
to improve well-being. Secondly, it sets no limits to how much the
perceived value of different inputs can be seen to deviate, thereby
giving an excuse to any magnitude of disparities.

All this leads to a need to see beyond these apparently exclusive
choices. It is not necessary to base the theory of value on either
a mechanical reference to the labour time used to produce the
good, nor a narrow theory functioning as an excuse for capitalist
practices. A better alternative is to ground economic value on
the whole process, including reproduction, social interaction as
a basis for well-being, together with a notion of limits to growth
and consumption. I will now turn to the community economy
conception of value as articulated within timebanks, to see how
these theoretical points figure in that context."
(https://jyx.jyu.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/68219/1/ECEWAWS_The-conception-of-value.pdf)


==Characteristics of the community economy conception of value==

Teppo Eskelinen:

"Mainstream economics appears locked with the ostensible
necessity to choose between the labour theory of value and the
subjective theory of value. While within social science there
have been some theoretical attempts to surpass this dichotomy,
community economies can be seen as highly informative for these
attempts, as they not only theorise, but also practice given value
forms. Community economies insist in their practice on an idea
of value, which would better grasp the social element inherent in
economic activity. This social element of value is not reducible to
either subjective notions nor mere labour time.

The task is then to explicate a theory of value from the basis of
the conception embodied in practices of community economies.

Community economies should be understood as economic in the
sense that there is some facilitation of exchange or organisation of
resources. Further, there has to be some sufficiently shared value
conception. This conception can be implicit as well as explicit, yet
it will be enacted in the practices of the system. The unique form
of economic value, not accepting the mainstream economic way to
draw the distinction between economic and non-economic, is one
of the key components making community economies stand as a
distinct category.

Below, I will sketch the key aspects of an alternative (community
economy) conception of value as expressed in timebanking.

‘Alternative‘ should be understood here in the sense of deviating
from the hegemonic economics narrative, rather than as marginal:
the conception can be widely enacted in everyday social life, yet
discursively marginalised. The analysis will be based on a reading
of key materials introducing timebanking. 

This comprises of, first,
books and reports explaining the concept and ideology. Second,
different kinds of booklets, internet publications and info leaflets
are used. Third, this body of texts is complemented with interviews
of some long-term timebank developers. These interviews are not
systematically analysed within this chapter, but rather were used
as a basis on which to form a preliminary understanding of the
issue.

The purpose of the analysis is then to use existing material to
scrutinise a conception of value within practices of alternative
economies which could extend to inform the purposes of the
welfare state. The conception of value is presented in terms of
what is unique in it. Therefore, it includes no separate category
for use-value in general: the obvious fact that people seek services
because these services are useful for them."
(https://jyx.jyu.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/68219/1/ECEWAWS_The-conception-of-value.pdf)




=More information=


* for info on the ValueModels project, see: [[Semantic Web and Blockchain-Based Value Models]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]