
'''* Book: Value Networks and Collaboration. Verna Allee (with Olivier Schabe). ValueNetworks.com, 2011'''

URL = http://www.valuenetworksandcollaboration.com/home.html


=Description=

"We are publishing the details of conducting a Value Network
Analysis (VNA) as a non-proprietary methodology. This means it can
more readily meet the open method requirements of standards bodies. We
encourage adoption of the method in its full integrity - as a method
and framework for business modeling."

From the introduction:

"Work life is completely changing as social networking and
collaboration platforms allow a more human-centric way of organizing
work. Yet work design tools, structures, processes, and systems are
not evolving as rapidly, and in many cases are simply inadequate to
support the new flexible and networked ways of working.

Value Networks and the true nature of collaboration meets this
challenge head on with a systemic, human-network approach to managing
business operations and ecosystems. Value network modeling and
analytics provide better support for collaborative, emergent work and
complex activities.

With examples from everyday work teams through complex large-scale
networks, this book simply and coherently lays out the new basics of
collaborative work design and value creating networks. It explains the
underlying concepts and shows how to map, analyze, and leverage value
networks in a way that supports high social values and ethical
practices - and achieves fast business results."



[[Category:Cooperation]]


[[Category:Books]]