
'''* Article: Value, Rent, and the Political Economy of Social Media. By Jakob Rigi and Robert Prey. The Information Society  10/2015; 31(5):392.''' 

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282439801_Value_Rent_and_the_Political_Economy_of_Social_Media

=Abstract=

"Fuchs (2010, 2012) argues that users of social media produce
value and surplus value in the Marxian sense. Arvidsson and
Colleoni (2012) critique this hypothesis, claiming that Marx’s
theory of value is irrelevant to the regime of value production on
social media platforms in particular and in informational
capitalism in general. They claim that the affective relations and
financial speculations that generate value on social media are not
dependent on labor time. This article critically engages Fuchs,
and Arvidsson and Colleoni, by revisiting Marx’s theory of value.
Contra Fuchs, we argue that audiences do not produce value and
surplus value—neither for social nor for mass media. Contra
Arvidsson and Colleoni, we argue that so-called affective
relations (philia) do not produce value either. Instead we
demonstrate that social media generate revenue from four
primary sources—by leasing advertisement space to generate
advertisement rent, by selling information, by selling services to
advertisers, and by generating profits from fictitious capital and
speculative windfalls. All four, we argue, can be adequately
explained by Marx’s theory of value."
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282439801_Value_Rent_and_the_Political_Economy_of_Social_Media)


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]