An overview of wiki and blog articles about value:


=Value=

* [[Value]]

* [[Theories of Value]]. Overview by George Mobus.

#The Labor Theory of Value
#Marginal Theory of Value
#Objective Theory of Value
#Subjective Theory of Value
#[[Energy Theory of Value]]


==Labour Theory of Value==

* [[Labor Theory of Value]]
** [[Labour Theory of Value in Cognitive Capitalism]]
** Article: Life put to work: Towards a life theory of value. By Cristina Morini and Andrea Fumagalli (translated from the Italian by Emanuele Leonardi). Ephemera, special issue on Digital Labour, 10(3/4): 234-252 [http://www.ephemeraweb.org/journal/10-3/10-3morinifumagalli.pdf pdf]
** summary of 'classic' LTV, by Kevin Carson, http://mutualist.org/id48.html

* Why did Marx reject [[Labor Money]] ?

* The [[Value Theory of Labor]] ; to be distinguished from the "labor theory of value"; Brian Holmes explains.
** "Some theorists including Harvey speak not of the labor theory of value but rather of the "value theory of labor," stressing that it is the agency of the working classes, gained through conflict and struggle, that determines what the standard wage and the minimum acceptable standard of living will be. For this, see an excellent short piece by Bob Jessop:
[http://www.lancs.ac.uk/fass/sociology/papers/jessop-limits-to-capital.pdf PDF]. "



=Crisis of Value=

* The [[Crisis of Value Theory]], as summarized by Kevin Carson.
** The [[Crisis of Value and the Ethical Economy]]. By Adam Arvidsson, Michel Bauwens and Nicolai Peitersen. Journal of Futures Studies, May 2008, 12(4): 9 - 20 [http://www.jfs.tku.edu.tw/12-4/A02.pdf pdf]
** The [[ Dornbin Manifesto]], a Response to Adam Arvidsson on the [[Ethical Economy]]
** [[Adam Arvidsson on the Crisis of Value and the Ethical Economy]]

* The [[Contemporary Value Crisis and the Search for ‘Value Sovereignty]]'. Michel Bauwens and Vasilis Niaros.


=The Next Economy=

* Article: [[Introduction to Commons Economics]], By Michel Bauwens, Rok Kranjc, and Jose Ramos. Edited by Mayssam Daaboul, with the assistance of Simon Grant. January 2021


* Contributive Economy
** [[Shifting from a Commodity-Based Value Regime to a Contributory Value Regime]]
** Article: What do we mean when we say we are shifting from a capitalist 'commodity' economy, to a commons-based 'contributive' economy ? ... AND, how do we get there ? Michel Bauwens (with Vasilis Niaros), February 2024.
[https://4thgenerationcivilization.substack.com/p/what-do-we-mean-when-we-say-we-are]

* The [[Ethical Economy]]
** Book: The Ethical Economy. Rebuilding Value After the Crisis. By Adam Arvidsson and Nicolai Peitersen. Columbia University Press, 2013 [http://cup.columbia.edu/book/978-0-231-15264-8/]
** Read: [[Preface to the Ethical Economy]]

* [[Biocapitalism]] and [[Biolabour]]

[[Category:Labor]]
[[Category:P2P_Accounting]]
[[Category:Economics]]
[[Category:Commons_Economics]]