
See also: [[Open Value Network]] and [[Open Value Metrics]]

=Definition=


The [[Value Network]] definition from the Wikipedia at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_Network

"'''Value networks (value webs), are complex sets of social and technical resources that work together via relationships to create value in the form of knowledge, intelligence, products, services or social good.''' Included in a company’s value networks are research, development, design, production, marketing, sales, and distribution - working interdependently to add to the overall worth of products and services. Companies also have external facing value networks where value is created from the relationships and interactions between organizations, its customers or recipients, intermediaries, stakeholders, complementors and suppliers. Value network principles apply equally well to public agencies, civil society organizations and other purposeful networks focused on creating economic or social good."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_Network)


=Example=

The [[Sensorica]] [[Open Value Network]]:

"We are taking an iterative approach to solve the value accounting problem and to design and implement a sound value system, which allows individuals and small organizations to collaboratively create and distribute value. The main role of the value accounting system is to track different types of contributions, like time, financial, material..., and to compute a revenue share for all contributors, based on individual contribution. This is the core of the value accounting system. This is what it takes to transition from the social web to the collaborative/value producing web. This is what it takes to transition to a new economy, a p2p economy. 

In order to make value networks self-organize into creative and productive entities we need more than a sound value system. We are in fact developing the entire infrastructure of value networks, which includes communication, coordination and collaboration tools, a reputation system, a role system, an incentive system, a feedback system, a service system, a materials management system, a project/tasks management system, and many other modules. All these components interact with each other and form an empowering environment for  contributing member to express their passions, exchange and collaborate to create value. 

We are not just dreaming about this. SENSORICA is sustaining a continuous growth in value and in potential since its inception. It is the living proof of viability for the value network model."
(http://www.sensorica.co/value-networks)


=More Information=


See the entries on the [[Open Value Network]] and on [[Open Value Metrics]]


[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]