'''= digital currency, from the Hub Culture network, pegged to a basket of currencies and carbon futures'''

URL = http://www.hubculture.com/


=Description=

"The founder of a social network of globetrotting adventure-travelers called Hub Culture is an evangelist, of sorts, for peer-to-peer currencies. “You’re going to see inexorably, the movement towards peer to peer finance,” Stan Stalnaker says. “People will trade individually and independently among each other, all around the world. It’s going to happen, there’s no denying it,” he insists.

He’s created a digital currency called Ven, which is pegged to the dollar, and allows members of the social network to trade goods and services as well as knowledge.

“I’ve gained Ven by making introductions for other people or doing favors for other people in network,” says Tamara Giltsoff, a sustainability adviser to companies.

Stalnaker started the currency, partly to accommodate members who were juggling multiple currencies traveling all around the world.

He says a social network is an ideal place to start a personalized currency, as it has trust built into the infrastructure already."
(http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2009/09/09/the-currency-revolution/)


=Discussion=

Stan Stalnaker:

"On 4 July, 2007, the social collaboration network I founded, Hub Culture, released the first application for Ven, a new type of digital currency.  It was a watershed moment for us, and a confusing one, because the Ven had no value or exchange rate—it simply existed and could be issued and traded at will to friends.  Ven was a new type of money—as basic as picking up pebbles and assigning arbitrary values for favors or to say thanks.   Everyone laughed, and we soon learned that for a currency to have relevance, it must be measured against other things.  Currency needs an assigned value to be understood, a language to speak.

So in 2008 we assigned Ven a value language—10 VEN = 1 USD—and began to sell it for redemption between members and in Pavilions (retail places developed to accept the currency).  The fundamental advance in Ven was that it was global, digital, and could be exchanged to anyone, at little incremental cost. Later we made Ven more stable by pricing it from a basket of currencies, which meant the price moved less than a single national fiat currency.  To make it more grounded, we added commodities linking it to hard assets.  Then we added carbon futures, creating a carbon component to the value. The language was now efficient, stable and green, and today demand for Ven is growing rapidly. 

By and large, digital currencies are changing what money can be, and widening the vistas for how our global society determines and trades value.  The size of these economies is small but growing fast—with over 6.2 million Bitcoins in an economy worth almost $50 million USD. In Hub Culture, we have 5 million Ven circulating with a GDP equal to over $500,000 USD growing at 10x annually.  Ven plays inside the more closed rules of the current system, but even Bitcoin, with its ‘radical’ open nature, is subject to the value quandary: to be traded, it must be assigned a value.  And if it can be assigned a value, it can be interchanged with anything else of assigned value.  The Internet is enabling exchange of all types of value, and helps us to measure and publish these values.  Taken to its theoretical and logical conclusion, the Internet and all content on the Internet—whether actual or representative (such as the price of a physical good or service)—will eventually be assigned a value. Once these values are assigned, essentially everything will become money, and currency itself will cease to exist."
(http://techcrunch.com/2011/05/20/bitcoin-ven-and-the-end-of-currency/)


=More Information=

* http://youtu.be/thaSbokWjAE



[[Category:Money]]