
'''= Bulgarian internet advocate'''

Current work at http://veni.com/currentwork.html


=Bio=

Go here for the links: http://veni.com/


"In 1990 Veni Markovski started his work on the Internet, as a system operator of the first Sofia-based bulletin-board system, part of FidoNet.

In 1993 Mr. Markovski formed with another of the Internet pioneers, Mr. Dimitar (aka Mitko) Ganchev, their company - bol.bg, which is also the second in history of Bulgaria Internet Service Provider, and is still running a successful business. Veni Markovski was President and CEO of BOL.BG for nine years.

In 1995 he founded the Bulgarian Internet Society.

In 1999 through his active work, Bulgaria accepted the most liberal laws concerning Internet development.

In 2002 Mr. Markovski was appointed as the Chairman of the Bulgarian President's IT Advisory Council.

In 2005 he was invited to be the senior international projects adviser to the chairman of the governmental Agency for Information Technologies and communications.

Mr. Markovski is also representing ICANN in Russia and the CIS.

Since the beginning of his carrer, Veni has been involved in different international organizations and programs on different levels - as adviser, senior adviser, advocate for policy changes, mediator, board member, etc. He has served on the Boards of CPSR, ISOC, ICANN, among others.

Widely recognized as an outstanding IT-expert and visionary, Mr. Markovski is a frequent speaker at international conferences, and is often being approached for advises by foreign and Bulgarian companies, organizations, and governments.

Veni Markovski is also involved in many other projects, among them:

*FOSS.bg - the UNDP Free and Open Source Software Project for SEEurope
*tOSSad - towards Open Source Software adoption and dissemination
*FLOSS world - Free/Libre/Open Source Software: Worldwide impact study"
(http://veni.com/)


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Standards]]