
=Discussion=

==Venture Capital Demands Equity==

How Venture Capital reproduces capitalist social relations, by Ian Wright:

"Venture capital provides the very first initial outlay in a circuit of money-capital. Its a kind of bootstrap capital that initiates an entirely new circuit.

In this sense, then, Venture capital is the prime motor of the birth of new firms.

But it’s not the prime motor of the birth of any kind of firm. It brings into existence specifically capitalist firms.

I’ll explain this with an example. Let’s imagine, for a moment, that we (you, I, and some friends) collectively want to start a widget-making business. We pitch the idea to Venture Capitalists, and they like it.

We ask for a 100,000 pounds loan. And we propose an interest-rate on the loan that includes an additional risk premium, since we recognize that our widget-making business might fail before we can replay the loan. We also propose that our firm’s assets, such as the widget-making machines we buy with the loan, will act as collateral. So if our business fails then the Venture Capitalists can reduce their losses by liquidating those assets.

Now, this seem like a fair proposal to us, especially given that Venture Capitalists spread their risk across a wide portfolio of new ventures.

Nevertheless, we wouldn’t get very far, and we’d be rather quickly ejected from their offices.

The reason is very simple. Venture Capitalists are not interested in extending loans to start-ups. What they want is equity – they want shared ownership of the firm. And ideally they want a controlling stake in the firm. The problem with a loan, from their point-of-view, is that it can be paid off. At which point, the firm is entirely ours, and they have no further claim on the profits that our labour creates.

In many ways, a loan is too much like an equal exchange for their tastes.

In stark contrast, equity gives them an enduring claim on the profits of a firm. Once they have equity they can claim a share of the profits of others labour for as long as they hold the shares, and for as long as the firm operates.

Equity capital is essentially exploitative. And this is why Venture Capitalists want it. And since they have a monopoly on the supply of Capital they demand it, and get it.

So we, who want to start our widget-making business, are faced with this external fact: in order to get funding we must incorporate a capitalist firm and allow owners of capital
to lay claim on the labour of others.

So it’s right here, at the moment of the birth of new firms, that capitalists inject exploitative property relations."
(https://ianwrightsite.wordpress.com/2018/08/02/venture-capitalism-versus-venture-communism/)


==Venture capital means exits==

Aral Balkan:

"Here’s how venture capital works: you go to an investor, before you’ve even built the thing you’re building and you tell them how you’re going to exit. It’s called an exit plan or exit strategy. You tell them, for example: “Hey, we’re going to get 100 million people using our new platform in two years time, how much will you give me for 100 million people?” And they go “Umm, we’ll give you this much for 100 million people because we’re pretty sure we can get that amount back several times over when we sell those 100 million people in an exit either to another company or in an IPO.”
When you take venture capital, it is not a matter of if you’re going to sell your users, you already have. It’s called an exit plan. And no investor will give you venture capital without one. In the myopic and upside-down world of venture capital, exits precede the building of the actual thing itself. It would be a comedy if the repercussions of this toxic system were not so tragic.

Let me put it bluntly: if a company has taken venture capital, you have already been sold. It’s not a matter of if, it’s simply a matter of when. (Unless the company goes under before it can exit, that is.)

A venture-capital funded startup is a temporary company that has to convince enough people into using their platform so that they can make good on the exit they promised their investors at the very beginning. It is the opposite of a long-term, sustainable business."
(https://aralbalkan.com/notes/ello-goodbye/)


==99.93% of companies should not be using venture capital==

Bryce Dot VC:

"When I got started in venture capital conventional wisdom said there are really six companies a year that mattered. What that meant is that six companies a year could achieve a hundred million in revenue or a billion in valuation. And, that those six companies drove 95% of the returns for our industry. So you could make the case that those were really the only companies that matter.

Having one, or multiple if these billion dollar businesses became job one in venture. Quite literally, nothing else matters. You will never be able to pay back your funds if you do not have one of these 6 companies a year.

At least, that was the belief but there wasn’t a lot of data to support it.

So last year Eileen Lee, did this amazing study where she dug into data going back to 2003. And what her data shows is actually that the number wasn’t six, it was four. Four companies a year matter. Which represents  .07% percent of the companies funded in a given year end up fulfilling the promise of venture capital.

Put another way.

99.93 percent of companies are using a product, venture capital, that really doesn’t work for them.

As a VC, I’m in a position where I have a product that doesn’t work for 99.93% of my customers. And that has been grating on me."
(http://bryce.vc/post/130071493425/my-xoxo-talk)


[[Category:Peerfunding]]