


=Source=

Excerpted from an article, Economic Conscience and Public Discourse, to be published in Capital and Class in January 2011. Author?


=Description=

"We want to discuss these ‘vernacular societies’ because we think they articulate an intrinsic economic conscience as an active expression of collective economic purpose, and so hold broader lessons on re-combining ethics and economy. In contrast to formal rationality and institutional self-validation, they exhibit a substantive rationality (Weber 1975) that focuses more clearly upon the ‘ultimate ends’ of any collectively organised endeavour. For instance, Nabeel Hamdi’s describes vernacular activities in South America,

… in practice, we need often to act spontaneously, to improvise and to build by small increments. First, spontaneity, as a quality of practice, is vital because most problems and opportunities appear and disappear in fairly random fashion and need to be dealt with or taken advantage of accordingly. Sometimes problems appear all at once and not according to predictable patterns. One therefore has to be selective, knowing that as one problem has been dealt with another will appear equally randomly. When you have run out of resources but not out of problems, you improvise – inventing rules, tasks or techniques as you go along. Improvisations then become a means of devising solutions to solve problems which cannot be predicted, a process full of inventive surprises that characterise the informal way in which many poor people gain employment, make money and build houses… (Hamdi 2004. p. 26)

Whilst formal rationality is often necessary for regular, reliable and predictable organisations, it too often becomes an 'iron cage' that stultifies inventive engagement and encourages depersonalisation. Substantively rational combinations of economic rules and conscience are often more reasonable. For instance, Dama is the name Malians give to their cultural tradition of active mutual care based upon ‘…a rich web of (caring) relationships’. We all tend to preserve our most developed ethical sensibilities for those we cherish the most, our family and friends. The tradition of Dama articulates an economic conscience that values recognition and care for strangers too. It might provide small things like a fellow traveller giving you a little change for the bus, through to providing a meal for a hungry traveller, up to providing all a women’s needs for 40 days after she has given birth. Compared to Western economic individualism, Dama is a more enlightened tradition of enlightened self-interest whereby appropriate economic conduct for each individual is consciously understood as actively giving to some and receiving from others so that everyone’s needs are more securely attended to. It is a reflection of Malian’s cultural tradition of generosity as the highest expression of ‘human-ness’ and their belief that only by providing for all can anyone live with dignity. 

In their own words, Malians believe that Dama,

… keeps at bay much of the suffering and misery that official stats indicate should be the lot of the vast majority. It maintains dignity and strong values. It keeps tradition and society intact. Dama is based on the value of sharing and 'being human', and is propagated primarily through a strong, though informal, women's social network

The traditions of comida and impostura in Central America have a tradition of communal food that might stand as a metaphor for a similarly intrinsic economic conscience geared towards the common good, 

Impostura… rooted in radical worlds of commons, creates ‘we’s’ in and through the communion of food embedded in soil (agri)culture… (it)  has a symbolic meaning and is, at the same time… an informal contractual relationship, where the partners make an implicit promise to each other to exchange part of their meal with each other. (Esteva and Prakash 1998. p. 32)

There are many other cultural traditions that share a similarly intrinsic economic conscience – the ‘gift economies’ and potlatch communities described by anthropologist such as Marcel Mauss (1966) and Lewis Hyde (2006); the tradition of Jogjami in India; the myriad micro-experiments in conviviality and community development articulated by the World Social Forum in Another World is Possible (Fisher and Ponniah 2003), Cuban experiments in communal food production, and many more.

In contrast to the technocratic un-Reason recently exhibited by our Establishment institutions, Majid Rahnema’s (1997) ideal type summarises the ‘organic consistency’ within 'vernacular societies'. He describes how ‘multi-dimensional’ social, economic, political and environmental ends tend to be in more holistic relationships to inform local economic purpose. Intrinsic economic conscience forms an ‘immune system’ which tries to protect local communities against global economic vicissitudes and ’organisational risk’ (Beck 1992) by encouraging ‘a living tissue of social and cultural relations defining the activities of their members’. Their economic conscience proactively animates rules for pursuing the common good rather then being merely a reactive break upon incipient amorality. As such, ethical and moral considerations within economic conduct are not abstract but part of the cultural ‘architecture’ that guides day-to-day personal interaction already situated against the values of reciprocity. For instance, perceptions of community need and practical definitions of what is essential are often animated by a culture of voluntary simplicity that differs markedly from Western culture of unlimited growth and maximised consumption. An older meaning of the word austerity, as a careful and responsible relationship with one’s resources as a progressive and positive mind-set describes this aspect of their economic conscience. This animates an ecological vigilance and care-full dialogue with nature, and by extension with other people. Their economic conscience tends to favour a minimisation of risk and a ‘prudent attitude towards innovation’. This contrasts markedly with Western growth fetishism as an internally self-validating economic objective that continues to deliver economic and ecological insecurity to the world. These characteristics contrast markedly with the internally self-validating institutional propositions we considered above because they demonstrate coherence between the rules, ‘justifying ideology’ and economic conscience. And perhaps this is the fundamental point. Market economies will always have a problem with economic conscience so long as their rules embody amorality, their ‘justifying ideology’ celebrates economic individualism and actual institutional conduct is so disconnected from broader considerations of common good and sustainability."

[[Category:Articles]]