
=Description=

'''1.'''

"the Conféderation Paysanne is only one node, albeit one of
the most significant amongst those in developed regions, of the vast
Via Campesina network that links very diverse farming communities in
the North and the South of the world. These communities are
connected by a commonality of goals and approaches. First amongst
these is the construction of food sovereignty in its various expressions."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/12dallacosta2.pdf)

'''2. Elizabeth Mpofu and Ndabezinhle Nyoni:'''

"Before the birth of La Via Campesina, various new and
diverse forms of rural activism and social organisation
had emerged, to forge common ground and solidarity
to fight against neoliberalism. These carved out an
autonomous space, independent of those who had
paternalistically claimed to represent them, such as the
church, conservative political parties and existing civil
society organisations (CSOs). La Via Campesina emerged
during this period and morphed from a local peasant
movement to a regional one, and then grew to be what
it is today, an international peasant movement bringing
together more than 164 organisations in over 73 countries
in Africa, the Americas, Asia and Europe. Its constituency
numbers over 200 million peasants, small and
medium-sized producers, landless people, rural workers
and indigenous people from around the world.

La Via Campesina, unlike many CSOs, established important
criteria for building its membership and setting
the principles for funding (Martinez-Torres and Rosset
2010). It does not accept into membership organisations
that are not true, grassroots-based peasant organisations.

It made a decision not to accept funding resources
with compromising conditions attached, nor to permit
any form of external interference in its internal decisions,
thus guaranteeing its independence and autonomy
(Rosset and Martinez 2005, cited by Martinez-Torres
and Rosset 2010). This has allowed La Via Campesina be
a strong, bottom-up and independent movement, led
by poor people. Its agenda is defined internally during
international conferences, which are organised every
four years, with decisions taken by consensus or voting.
In contrast, La Via Campesina’s participation in policy
spaces is more confrontational, engaging in protest and
aggressive debate.

La Via Campesina is anchored in promoting food sovereignty
and advocating for sustainable, small-scale,
peasant agriculture as a means of promoting social
justice and dignity. The concept of food sovereignty
has proved to be one within which humanity can find
an enabling and unrestricted space to promote social
justice and dignity, in a world that is highly centralised,
and where power is concentrated in a few transnational
corporations (TNCs). Food sovereignty is a tool
being used by consumers and food producers to move
towards a “food democracy” of “co-designed food
systems…” where people “…participate in shaping
them, to recapture them,” (De Schutter 2015 p1). It
has created a space to rebuild the human relations lost
over decades as a result of globalised food systems, and
also to redress the ecological crisis of the 21st century.

The food sovereignty concept seeks the construction of
new rights and the transformation of society as a whole."
(http://civicus.org/images/SOCS2015_ESSAY21_LaViaCampesina.pdf)



=Discussion=


'''1. By Eric Holt-Giménez:'''

"In 1993 farm leaders from around the world gathered in Mons, Belgium for a conference on policy research put on by a Dutch NGO allied with the International Federation of Agricultural Producers (IFAP), an international farm federation dominated by large-scale, northern farmers. What emerged instead was an international peasant movement: La Vía Campesina. The emergence of an international peasant-led farmer federation signified both a break with conventional federations run by large producers and with the humanitarian NGOs typically concerned with peasant agricultural production. The Mons declaration asserted the right of small farmers to make a living in the countryside, the right of all people to healthy food, and the right of nations to define their own agricultural polices.21

Since its inception, Vía Campesina’s main objective has been to halt neoliberalism and construct alternative food systems based on food sovereignty. It was formed with organizations mostly from the Americas and Europe, but has since expanded to include more than 150 rural social movements from over 79 countries, including 12 countries in Africa, and scores of organizations in South and East Asia. Unlike its large farmer counterpart IFAP, Vía Campesina is made up almost entirely of marginalized groups: landless workers, small farmers, sharecroppers, pastoralists, fisherfolk, and the peri-urban poor.

Vía Campesina has been remarkably successful in creating the political space in which to advance its platform of food sovereignty, getting the WTO out of agriculture, women’s rights, sustainable agriculture, a ban on GMO’s, and redistributive agrarian reform. The movement was instrumental in organizing protests at WTO ministerial meetings from Seattle to Hong Kong. Vía Campesina played the lead role in the FAO International Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development in 2006, and mounted successful resistance campaigns to the World Bank’s market-led land reform programs.

Vía Campesina has also been among the most vocal critics of institutional responses to the global food crisis. At the High Level Task force meeting on the food crisis in Madrid, Spain, Vía Campesina released a declaration demanding that solutions to the food crisis be completely independent of the institutions responsible for creating the crisis in the first place (i.e., the IMF, World Bank, WTO, and CGIAR). The declaration reaffirmed the call for food sovereignty, demanded an end to land grabs for industrial agrofuel and foreign food production, and called on the international community to reject the Green Revolution and instead support the findings of the UN’s International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge Science and Technology for Development (IAASTD). This seminal assessment, sponsored by five UN agencies and the World Bank, and authored by over four hundred scientists and development experts from more than eighty countries, concluded that there is an urgent need to increase and strengthen further research and adoption of locally appropriate and democratically controlled agroecological methods of production, relying on local expertise, local germplasm, and farmer-managed, local seed systems."
(http://monthlyreview.org/090831holt-gimenez.php)


'''2. Elizabeth Mpofu and Ndabezinhle Nyoni:'''

"The effectiveness and sustainability of La Via Campesina
can largely be attributed to its organisational structure,
internal democratic participation processes and
the concept of food sovereignty, as key resources for
fighting for rights and justice, and offering an alternative
to global food markets. Its strategy and tactics of
mass mobilisation, including by weaving and forging
strategic alliances with likeminded social movements
and CSOs willing to play supportive, but not directive,
roles, are also crucial. This has enabled La Via
Campesina to remain entrenched locally, while at the
same time flexing its muscles globally, both at protest
events in and policy dialogue spaces. The principle of
not accepting funding from institutions supporting
neoliberalism is also key in keeping La Via Campesina
self-determined and autonomous, and being able to
define its struggles without external influence.

Food sovereignty sustains the strategic role of peasant
production in fighting hunger, and deepens dialogue,
building solidarity against adversity and cooperation
against competition, and building alliances across
national borders. Food sovereignty has created an urgency
to develop alternative food systems that allow
people to democratise and re-localise, rather than be
ruled by market imperatives."
(http://civicus.org/images/SOCS2015_ESSAY21_LaViaCampesina.pdf)



=More Information=

* Essay in the Monthly Review: [http://monthlyreview.org/090831holt-gimenez.php From Food Crisis to Food Sovereignty]. The Challenge of Social Movements. By Eric Holt-Giménez
* [[Food Sovereignity Movement]]
* [[Campesino a Campesino]]
* M E Martinez-Torres and P M Rosset (2010), ‘La Via Campesina:
the birth and evolution of a transnational social movement’, The
Journal of Peasant Studies, Vol. 37, No. 1, p.149-175


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]