
'''Article: Motivation, Governance, and the Viability of Hybrid Forms in Open Source Software Development.''' MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Vol. 52, No. 7, July 2006, pp. 1000–1014. By Sonali K. Shah, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, sonali@uiuc.edu

URL = http://mansci.journal.informs.org/content/vol52/issue7/ 

Available via http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=898247

=Abstract=

"Open source software projects rely on the voluntary efforts of thousands of software developers, yet we
know little about why developers choose to participate in this collective development process. This paper
inductively derives a framework for understanding participation from the perspective of the individual software
developer based on data from two software communities with different governance structures.
In both communities, a need for software-related improvements drives initial participation. The majority of
participants leave the community once their needs are met, however, a small subset remains involved. For this
set of developers, motives evolve over time and participation becomes a hobby. '''These hobbyists are critical to
the long-term viability of the software code: They take on tasks that might otherwise go undone and work
to maintain the simplicity and modularity of the code. Governance structures affect this evolution of motives.'''
''Implications for firms interested in implementing hybrid strategies designed to combine the advantages of open
source software development with proprietary ownership and control are discussed''.


=Conclusion=

"Governance practices can create shortcomings in
hybrid forms, although some shortcomings can be
ameliorated. For example, the firm sponsoring the
gated source community has significant resources at
its disposal and employed a team of developers and
marketers to work on the gated source project. These
employees took care of many of the tasks—such as
assisting participants, incorporating suggestions and
code, and maintaining the overall architecture of the
code—that would have been fulfilled by volunteer
hobbyists in the open source community.

Innovation communities represent a novel model for
innovation development that has been documented in
a number of diverse product areas. Our knowledge of
this novel structure and the societal benefits it creates
is growing, but many questions and issues remain to
be explored. In this paper, I investigate issues pertaining
to participation and governance in two software
communities. I find that fun and challenge are
key drivers of participation for hobbyists, a group
that is critical to the functioning of the open source
community. In addition, reciprocity and fairness are
important issues, strongly affecting the willingness of
volunteer developers to contribute to the community.
Firms seeking to construct hybrid arrangements that
balance community-based value creation with private
value appropriation may encounter difficulties:
the very mechanisms that allow them to appropriate
private benefits may deter participation.


=Excerpts=


==Reasons for participation==

"Three key findings were uncovered. First, reasons
for participation vary, but a critical subset of open
source developers—hobbyists—participate because
they derive enjoyment from the act of creating code.
Second, reciprocity is a crucial factor in motivating
contributions to the community. Third, governance
structure has a first-order effect on patterns of participation.
Two additional distinctions not present in
the existing literature also emerged. First, the creation
and contribution of code and knowledge to the community
are two different activities and are motivated
by different sets of factors.1 Second, the outcomes that
motivate behavior are not always the same as the outcomes
generated by the behavior. For example, some
developers do attain status within communities and
a select few have leveraged their open source efforts
into high-paying jobs. Yet, it does not appear that
these developers originally participated in the hopes
of obtaining these rewards."


==Open vs. Gated Communities==

"The key distinctions between the open and gated
communities are as follows. In the open source community,
anyone can download, use, modify, and distribute
the code. The code is owned by the collective
and a special subset of developers, called committers,
settle contested project decisions. In the gated source
community, only those who have agreed to a license
with the corporate sponsor can download, use, or
modify the code. The license stipulates that the code
may only be shared with other licensees. The corporate
sponsor owns the code and retains the right to
make project decisions. Finally, licensees who use the
code for commercial purposes must pay a royalty to
the corporate sponsor.

To be considered “open source,” a project’s
licensing terms must meet the 10 requirements of the
open source definition (Open Source Initiative 2004).
Gated approaches attempt to selectively combine the
benefits of collective development with the corporate
benefits of private ownership and control. They are
more restrictive than open source licenses from the
perspective of the developer."


==Volunteers Behave Differently in Open Source and Gated Source Communities==

Although the open source community greatly benefited
from the presence of hobbyist developers, virtually
all long-term gated source participants continued
to focus on need as their primary reason for project
involvement.

In describing their activities within the gated source
community, participants voiced blatant disapproval of
two elements of the governance structure: The level
of code control held by the sponsor (the sponsor is the
only actor able to make changes to the source code)
and ownership by the corporate sponsor.

Ownership by the corporate sponsor raised four
issues. 

The first issue involves unrestricted use of the
code by the participant.

The second issue involves the fairness of restrictions
on wider code use and distribution.

The third issue involves various scenarios under
which the sponsor might inadvertently or deliberately,
in the words of a participant, “appropriate
code away” from the community. For example, conflicts
over ownership and use might arise if the
sponsor goes out of business, chooses to discontinue
the project, or wants to sell the code. 

The fourth
issue involves problems created by the commercialuse
clause of the license. Although the code may be
used freely for developmental work by other firms,
commercial use requires the negotiation and payment
of a royalty fee to the sponsor. Many participants were
wary that the sponsor might stipulate outrageous
license terms for commercial use after the participant
(on behalf of an employer or himself) invested in the
creation of a product based on the code."


==Property Rights, Fairness, and Reciprocity==

This study highlights the importance of fairness in
supporting exchange relationships. In this setting,
property and decision-making rights affected individuals’
perceptions of fairness, which in turn affected
their behaviors. Participants in each community were
aware of who controlled property and decisionmaking
rights and appear to view that actor as their
primary exchange partner. That is to say, when assessing
reciprocity within the community and choosing
the extent to which they wish to create and contribute
code, open source participants focus on the
actions of volunteer community members, whereas
gated source participants focus on the actions of the
corporate sponsor.

Those driven by their own needs might pursue either well-known
or novel dimensions, potentially creating innovations that are useful
to many or only to themselves, and that extend existing functionality
or create altogether new functionality.

Cognitive evaluation theorists argue that intrinsic motivation is
based on feelings of competence and self-determination—feelings
supported by feedback in the form of information and rewards
from external sources (Boggiano and Pittman 1992; Deci 1971, 1975;
Deci et al. 1999; Lepper and Greene 1978). Informational content
heightens feelings of competence and strengthens the feeling of
internal control, raising (“crowding in”) intrinsic motivation. In
contrast, controlling content heightens feelings of being stressed from
the outside and strengthens perceived external control, decreasing
(“crowding out”) intrinsic motivation. Additional research is
required to understand the mechanisms by which the community
encourages its members to provide informational content and quell
controlling content.

Collecting such data on the career progression of volunteer software
developers will improve our understanding of the individual
and institutional-level factors supporting community-based innovation
(for examples and a discussion of research on careers, see
Barley 1989, Becker 1963, Goffman 1959, Hogg and McGarty 1990).

This information will aid in the design and management of innovation
communities, and potentially in the design and management
of other types of nonprofit organizations relying on volunteer labor.

It may also improve our ability to design more satisfying work
environments for engineers and other technical professionals.
The possibility of opportunistic ("unfair") actions by
those holding control rights can both decrease and
alter the character of volunteer participation. Gated
source developers feared that the corporate sponsor
might exercise control rights in a strategic manner
benefiting the corporation over the community. As a
result, gated source participants invested effort only
if they very much needed the software and were less
likely to contribute their findings to the community.

Moreover, they were unwilling to engage in fun and
challenging development activities, depriving themselves
of an enjoyable activity and depriving the community
of their efforts and talents. From the perspective
of behavioral game theory and evolutionary psychology,
it is not surprising that perceptions of fairness
weigh heavily into an individual’s decision to
work with others and even leads individuals to punish
others at a cost to themselves (Barkow et al. 1992;
Kahneman et al. 1986a, b). From this perspective, the
creation of a neutral and accessible commons is crucial
for fostering community-based innovation. Keeping
a resource in the commons both allows others to
draw on the resource and mitigates the number of
strategic games played by others (Lessig 2001, p. 72).


For firms, community development
offers the possibility to gain developmental assistance
in noncritical areas and increase adoption (West 2003).
Value appropriation requires the firm to define and
control property rights. Unfortunately, activities that
permit value appropriation by the firm are sometimes
detrimental to value creation within the community."


==Typology of Governance Rights in Gated Source Communities==

===Decision Rights:===

"'''Code Control'''. In the gated source community, only
the corporate sponsor is allowed to alter the source
code. This strict control over the code affects both
need-driven and hobbyist participants. Need-driven
participants worry that their voices will be drowned
out by the needs of the firm and its customers when
software-related decisions are made. Such control limits
the ability of hobbyists to work and contribute in
self-defined ways. In addition, the volume of feedback
and overall activity is likely to decline due to
both decreased participation and tighter control over
what is committed to the source code and, therefore,
used by others.

'''Domination of Mailing List Interaction.''' Firms may
inadvertently dominate mailing lists through a desire
to influence the direction of the project or because
firm employees represent a substantial portion of the
participant pool, as might be the case when a firmsponsored
community is newly created. This may
act to inhibit developers from voicing heterogeneous
views, resulting in decreased volunteer participation.
This relationship was not directly observed in this
study, however developers’ distaste of tightly controlled
open source projects was observed.


===Property Rights===

"'''Private Ownership of Source Code.''' Private ownership
of the code acts to dismantle the collective development
process in a variety of ways. Most noticeably,
ownership by the firm creates the possibility that the
developer will not have access to the code at a later
date. Participants value the results of their efforts and
expect to continue using the software well into the
future. The open source project gave them this right,
but the gated source project did not make this guarantee.

Private ownership also appears to inhibit reciprocity:
if the firm is not donating the code to the
community, why should the developer take additional
time and effort to donate code to the firm?

'''Restrictions on Use, Modification, and Distribution.'''

The restrictions placed on the gated code with respect
to commercial use, modification, and distribution all
act to reduce the degrees of freedom that an individual
can exercise when using and creating the code,
particularly when compared to open source licensing
arrangements. These restrictions can be thought of as
limiting the value available to the individual developer,
i.e., the developer can only use the code for
certain purposes, modifications made and deployed
must meet community standards (rather than his own
preferences), and the code may only be shared with
others willing to abide by the community’s governance
arrangements, thereby decreasing the volume
of subsequent improvements and feedback that many
developers relish. On the other hand, these restrictions
might create value for the company.

Restrictions on commercial use in the gated source
community created additional problems because
licensing terms were negotiated with the firm on an
individual basis. This decreased trust dramatically
by creating the possibility of ex post hold-up problems.
Restrictions on commercial use with terms set
in advance and applicable to everyone may be less
problematic.

'''Proprietary Modifications.''' A large part of the longstanding
debate between free and open source
software advocates concerns proprietary modifications.
Software derived from free software cannot
be made proprietary."



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Governance]]