
[[Platform Cooperativism 2016]] presentation via https://livestream.com/internetsociety/platformcoop2016/videos/141713972

=Description=

Platform Co-op Showcase 11 - Seedbloom:

"(17 mins) Victor Matekole - Seedbloom is building an accessible, uncompromising, ethical, and sustainable investment path for entrepreneurs around the globe. As a non-for-profit, it is a seeding, equity crowdfunding, and governance platform for co-ops and ethically driven enterprises. In addition, Seedbloom is supporting existing co-ops with regard to growth strategies and the raising of capital. Seedbloom is combining progressive cryptographic technologies including IPFS, smart contracts, and immutable ledgers, with its work with a team of legal experts and coders. It streamlines the challenging process of devising bylaws, incorporation, and membership acquisition for platform co-ops. Seedbloom reduces the cost, time, and effort for founders when seeding an organization. Seedbloom addresses the “capital problem” faced by cooperative platforms by providing access to capital through public equity crowd sales. It offers founders the opportunity to connect with experienced investors and potential advisory board members, and a wide-ranging user base. Its vision is to enable a fairer distribution of capital/wealth by fostering global cooperatives and “triple-bottom line enterprises” that foreground not only profit but also earth, and people."

[[Category:Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Platform Cooperatives]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]