

=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"Vidding is the practice of creating fan-made music videos (sometimes called songvids or fanvids) that edit clips from favorite TV shows, anime series, movies, or even official music videos, to another song. It is a cross between narrative story-telling and visual poetry and their content can range from a simple tribute to a favorite character or delve into shipping/slash. Interestingly, while a large number of anime video-makers (or vidders) are male, the bulk of vidders in media (TV/film) fandom are women (although these general lines are beginning to slightly blur). The first songvid was made by Kandy Fong in the 1970s when, at a Star Trek convention, she combined stills on a slide projector and a cassette player. Shortly after that, the Sony Betamax became available to the consumer, and vidders were able to take video clips from taped shows and place them over their own soundtracks. Most fan-run conventions (Bascon, Escapade, MediaWest*Con, etc.) host music video shows or vid shows. With the advent of new digital media, fan vids have been made more possible by digitization. Episodes of television shows can be transferred into a different format and made accessible on the computer and internet The practice of vidding also seems to follow some of the ideas in the hacker ethic, whereby all information is seen by the users as free, and can be improved in an act of creativity on the computer. Supporters, or shippers, of certain on-screen couples are able to manipulate clips into expressing a more romantic angle, often changing scenes into how the shippers wanted them to be in the first place. Whether these count as improvements depend solely on fans. It could be argued that using copyrighted material in vidding has generated allowed for greater creativity among groups of people who would not engage in such practices otherwise."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vidding)


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]