
'''= Fab Lab Vigyan Ashram: " organization has been working with the local community of Pabal since 1983 to
solve problems in the region with the help of low-cost materials and traditional tools".''' 

URL = http://vigyanashram.com

=Description=

By Kushboo Balwani:

"The first Fab Lab outside of MIT, the Vigyan Ashram Fab Lab worked with MIT in
procuring the latest tools and machines for collaborative production, rather than relying on
ready-made solutions. Since then, several Fab Labs have been created worldwide.
Indeed, today there are some 665 Fab Labs in 65 countries. Taken as a whole, Fab Lab is
a distributed international network of scientific researchers and community inventors who
define, conduct, and apply new discoveries and inventions for the benefit of both
researchers and the local community. Fab Labs support a global design commons where
members design, code, share knowledge, and create digital instruction manuals using
open-source principles. What gets designed in one lab can theoretically be fabricated in
another lab, anywhere in the world.

The projects at the Vigyan Ashram Fab Lab emerge either from local researchers or the
local community. Once projects are conceived, the organization passes them to its
students and opens a global discussion within the larger network of Fab Labs to leverage 
open designs and shared knowledge. Several prototypes are made locally and tested
within the community using shared assets (space, knowledge, tools) until the final design
is developed."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)

=Status=

"Results:

• The Vigyan Ashram Fab Lab has developed a number of innovative solutions to
local problems, such as a pedal-powered generator, egg incubator, and weather
data lodger.

• Thanks to its proven solutions, the Vigyan Ashram Fab Lab has become a point of
reference and a consultant to local and national authorities on urban challenges.
Furthermore, it has inspired the government of India and the state government of
Maharashtra to develop a plan to establish tinkering labs and innovation centers at
both local and district levels, as reported by Yogesh Kulkarni, executive director of
Vigyan Ashram."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)

=More information=

* Fab Lab Pabal: http://vigyanashram.com/InnerPages/FabLab.aspx

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:India]]

[[Category:Places]]