
* Master's Thesis: Village Community and Peasant Society in Medieval England. By NAMANANDA HENDERSON.

URL = http://ufdcimages.uflib.ufl.edu/UF/E0/01/78/93/00001/henderson_n.pdf

A THESIS PRESENTED TO THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT
OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA 2006 


=Description=

"This thesis provides an overview of the scholarship examining the nature of the village
community in medieval England. Beginning my analysis in the late nineteenth century I discuss
the socio-political context within which the first studies of village communities emerged and I
examine the influence of Romanticist traditions on the scholarship. I then look at the emergence
and development of the social sciences in the early and mid-twentieth century, especially the rise
of a more interdisciplinary approach within the social sciences as evidenced by a number of
developments including the Annales School in France. Turning to the last two decades of the
twentieth century, I describe the development of new theoretical models of community, which
were developed by social scientists during the second half of the twentieth century. When
applied to the study of the medieval village community, these models suggest that scholars must
begin to move away from simplistic, binary conceptions of the village community. Finally, by
examining how a few of the authors made use of the medieval documentary evidence I argue that
scholars until very recently drew only upon those sources which fit their preconceived notions,
which emphasized the communal organization and solidarity of the village community. "

[[Category:UK]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:P2P History]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Research]]