'''* Books: The Great Leveler. Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century. By Walter Scheidel. Princeton University Press, 2017'''

URL = https://press.princeton.edu/titles/10921.html


=Contextual Citation=

"I wrote   this   book   to   show   that   the   forces   that   used   to   shape inequality have not in fact changed beyond recognition. If we seek to rebalance  the  current  distribution  of  income  and  wealth  in  favor  of greater equality, we cannot  simply  close  our  eyes  to  what  it  took  to accomplish  this  goal  in  the  past. We  need  to  ask  whether  great inequality   has ever   been   alleviated   without   great   violence...and whether the future is likely to be very different—even if we may not like the answers."

- Walter Scheidel (p. 22, cited in: [https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0hb2v9j1])


=Description=

"Are mass violence and catastrophes the only forces that can seriously decrease economic inequality? To judge by thousands of years of history, the answer is yes. Tracing the global history of inequality from the Stone Age to today, Walter Scheidel shows that inequality never dies peacefully. Inequality declines when carnage and disaster strike and increases when peace and stability return. The Great Leveler is the first book to chart the crucial role of violent shocks in reducing inequality over the full sweep of human history around the world.

Ever since humans began to farm, herd livestock, and pass on their assets to future generations, economic inequality has been a defining feature of civilization. Over thousands of years, only violent events have significantly lessened inequality. The "Four Horsemen" of leveling—mass-mobilization warfare, transformative revolutions, state collapse, and catastrophic plagues—have repeatedly destroyed the fortunes of the rich. Scheidel identifies and examines these processes, from the crises of the earliest civilizations to the cataclysmic world wars and communist revolutions of the twentieth century. Today, the violence that reduced inequality in the past seems to have diminished, and that is a good thing. But it casts serious doubt on the prospects for a more equal future.

An essential contribution to the debate about inequality, The Great Leveler provides important new insights about why inequality is so persistent—and why it is unlikely to decline anytime soon."
(https://press.princeton.edu/titles/10921.html)


=Contents=

Daniel Hoyer:

"Part I offers 3 chapters describing the long-run trends of inequality, from our hierarchical  primate  ancestors  to  the  first  large-scale  egalitarian  movement  as hunter-gatherer tribes managed to curtail hierarchy in order to cooperate in their food   gathering,   to   the   return   of   inequalities as   sedentarism   took   hold   and resources   became   more   partible   and   heritable—inequalities   enshrined   and exacerbated   by   the   socio-political   hierarchies   of   the   earliest   large-scale   and complex   states.   

The   reader   is   then   thrust   forward   in   time   to   witness   the inequalities  present  in  the  two  major  agrarian  Empires  in  the  ancient  world, Rome  and  China,  which  Scheidel  calls  "the  closest analogues  to  modern  western countries(62)” for  their  large  size,  long  durability,  high  productivity,  and  severe hierarchy. 

We then get a broad survey of European history from the fall of Rome to   the   Industrial   Revolution,   a   period   that   witnessed   dramatic   periods   of growth — both    in    overall economic productivity    as    well    as    the    unequal distribution  of  this  production—along  with  periods  of  dramatic  leveling,  notably attended  by  major  international  wars  and  pandemic  outbreaks. Specifically,  the first   half   of   the   20thcentury,   which   saw   two   World   Wars   and   the   Great Depression,  was  not  only  one  of (perhaps)the  most  violent  periods of human history, but it also (or, as Scheidel would have it, consequently) witnessed one of the   largest   and   most widespread   period   of   inequality   reduction on   record. Scheidel  dubs  this  time  the 'Great  Compression'. In  all, however, the  general pattern  outlined in  these  chapters is  one  of  fairly  high  inequality  as  at  least  a pervasive,  if  not  an inherent property  of  large-scale,  agrarian,  complex  social formations — the   kind   that   have   dominated   the   planet   since   the   Neolithic Revolution some 10,000 years ago. 

After   this broad   survey   of   the   history   of   global   inequality, Parts II–V (encompassing  chapters  4  through  11)  each outline  one  of  the  4 Horsemen, providing  examples  of the  times they have  visited  human  society and  describing their   devastating — but inequality-reducing—effects. It   is   in   these   chapters particularly where Scheidel is able to display his considerable historical prowess, sweeping across time and space to offer numerous positive examples of the Great Lever  in  action from our  shared  past as well  as  more  contemporary  societies. These  chapters  do  an admirable job of interspersing quantitative measures — calculating changes in the top income share of select countries over the course of the  20thcentury,  approximating  the  mobilization  rates  of theEuropean  powers stretching all  the  way  back  to  the  17thcentury,  providing  estimates  for  the  daily wages  of unskilled  workers  in  ancient  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia,  or  counting  the death  toll  of  pandemics  from  the  Antonine  Plague  of  the  2ndcentury  to  the Bubonic  Plague  of  the  14th—within  qualitative  passages  about  the  societies  that experienced  one  of  the  violent  shocks,  and  how  inequality  was  affected  in  each case. The   chapters   in   these   Parts   comprise   the   bulk   of   the   book's   empirical contents. The   details of   each   case   and   historical   example   are thoroughly researched, well presented, and generally convincing.

...

Part  VI (more  below)  is indeed devoted  to  discussing  possible instances   of widespread   leveling that   were   not preceded   or   attended   by destructive  violence, with  Scheidel concluding  that the historical  record  simply does  not  present many ready  examples  of  this. He does  acknowledge  a  few  such cases,  as in  Chapter  13,  for  instance, when  he  notes that  many  Latin  American countries were largely sheltered from the violent shocks of World War II, yet did experience  temporary  reductions  in  inequality  in  the  post-war  period; however, he  stresses  that  these  reductions  were  very  short-lived  and  that  inequality  in Latin  America  generally increased between  1938  and  1970.  This  assessment  is presented  as  further  demonstration  of  the  general  tendency  for  complex,  highly productive   societies   to   produce   high   inequality   in   the   long   term.   This   is demonstrated  empirically  and  seems  to  hold  when  taking  a  survey  of  a  large number  of Latin  American countries  (15) over  a longer  time  span (1938–1970), but  it  cannot  quite  explain  the  (albeit  temporary)  leveling  that  was  achieved  in several of these countries in the 1950s and 1960s, leveling that occurred in spite of  an  absence  of  any  recent  'Great  Leveler'  (which  Scheidel  acknowledges,  but immediately   casts   aside(380))

...

Part VI proceeds to offer, then dash, the hopes of those readers who managed to  make  it  this  far  in  the  book  still  optimistic  of  a  brighter,  more  egalitarian future. 

Chapter  12  surveys  some  of  the  potential  levelers  that  could  reduce inequality without  the  need  to  first  devastate  and  destroy.  Specifically,  Scheidel cites land reform and debt relief (and state interventions into income and wealth distribution   more   broadly),   economic   crises   that   would   annihilate   wealth particularly   among   the   rich   (which at   least   theoretically   could   reduce   top incomes without bloodshed), and democratization, which has been shown to help keep   inequality   at   bay   though   itself   "cannot   be   treated   as   an   autonomous development  unrelated  to  violent  action"  (365);  democracies tend  to  develop after  violent  shocks,  and  have  proven  generally  ineffectual  at  limiting  violence within societies as well. All of these mechanisms are argued to fail the test, either because  they  typically  have  not  reduced  inequality  for  a  large  segment  of  the population  for  extended  periods  (i.e.  state  intervention  into  the  economy),  or have   themselves   generally   been   associated   with   one   of   the   Horsemen   (i.e. economic  crises  and  democratization arising  after  a  war,  or major  revolutions resulting  in  more  equitable  redistribution  coming  after  a  state  collapse/failure,  which  tends  to  be  quite  violent  as  well, such  as with  the case  of  the Bolshevick Revolution in Russia). 

Chapter 13 likewise offers education and economic growth as potential means of peaceable leveling, but again concludes that neither is very strongly  associated  with  inequality  reduction  (education  often  exacerbates  the problem,  Scheidel  notes,  by  producing  too  many  skilled  workers  for  a  labour market  where  they  are  not  in  demand,  putting  downward  pressure  on  wages, plus  skilled  labour  does  not  general  impact  capital  wealth,  which  in  fact  drives much global inequality), or only occur after some violent shock. 

Lastly, chapter 14 offers a few counterfactuals to assess if history would have produced instances of peaceful  leveling  had  the  violent  shocks  that  in  fact  occurred did  not.  Again,  the answer  is  a  resounding  'not  likely',  especially  for  the Great  Compression.  In Scheidel's  words,  "it  is  hard  to  see  how  capital  could  ever  have  been  destroyed and  devalued  on  as  comparable  scale  [as  in  fact occurred]  in  the  absence  of violent shocks (398);” namely, the two World Wars and the Great Depression.

...

Part VII recapitulates evidence for the growing inequality that has plagued the world   since   the 1970s   and   1980s, outlining   the   prospects   for   the   future. Consistent  with  earlier  chapters,  this  part  is  quite  pessimistic,  pointing  out  the myriad   indicators   that   inequality   is   likely   to   rise   both   between   and   within societies  in  the  coming  years.  The  hope  is  that  understanding  inequality  from  an historical  perspective  will  provide  us  with  the  tools  to  correct  or  avoid  past mistakes. A convincing, timely, and truly essential point to get across; still, a grim conclusion, for, if The Great Leveler is to be believed, then we have really only one of  two  terrible  choices facing  us: we either accept  and  acquiesce  to  the  reality  of high  (and  rising)  inequality,  or  we hope  to  be  visited  by a  Horseman  so  that whoever  manages  to  survive  the  shock  may  build  (at  least  temporarily)  more equitable societies. 

...

Finally,  an Appendix offers  a  detailed  summary  and  analysis  of  the  [[Inequality Possibility  Frontier]]  (IPF),  a  measure designed  by  economic  historians  Branko Milanovic,   Peter   Lindert,   and   Jeffrey   Williamson (Milanovic,    Lindert,    and  Williamson  2011) to  calculate  the  maximum possible distributional  inequality given  different  levels  of  overall  productivity. Scheidel  highlights the  limits  in measures like the Gini coefficient with a maximum of perfect inequality that could never actually be reached in practice. The IPF recognizes that there is a minimum amount  of  total  production  in  a  society  that must go  to  sustain  the  lives  of  the people  living  within  it—the  subsistence  level.  In  practice,  it  is  only  a  society's surplus   wealth   (its   production   beyond   the   subsistence   level)   that   can   be equitably   or   unequally   distributed—an   acknowledgement   of   realistic   wealth distribution   missing   from   Gini   coefficients   and   most   standard   measures   of inequality. "

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0hb2v9j1)

=Review=

Daniel Hoyer:

"The new  offering  from  Walter  Scheidel,  historian  of  ancient  Rome  and  long-time advocate  of  cross-cultural comparative history,  is  awe-inspiring  in  its  scope  and detailed  erudition  as  it  is  disheartening  in  its central message. The Great Leveler opens with  the  programmatic  observation  that  "Economic  inequality  may  only recently  have  returned  to  great  prominence  in  popular discourse, but  its  history runs  deep.  My  book  seeks  to  track  and  explain  this  history  in  the  very  long  run(xv).” Scheidel quickly  dashes  any  hope  of  finding  a  key  to a future egalitarian utopia in  history's  lessons, instead  outlining the various types  of devastating violence that typically (perhaps inevitably?) attended periods of relative equality. A  preview  of  the  book's  central  theme  comes  early  on,  where  Scheidel  posits: “were  there  also  other,  more  peaceful  means  of  lowering  inequality?  If  we  think of leveling on a large scale, the answer must be no(8).”In  the proceeding pages,  Scheidel  digests  massive  amounts  of  information—combining  quantitative  measures of  inequality  with  more  qualitative,  prosaic descriptions  of  social  developments  and  major  historical  events—culled  from nearly  every  corner  of  the  globe  and  sweeping  from  our  primate  ancestors thousands of years ago to our genetically-enhanced nano-technologically-boosted descendants in  the  nearish  future.

The  book's  focus,  of course,  is  on  the recent past   (since   Industrialization) and whether  —and,   if   so,   how—societies   have managed  to  achieve  something  like  an  equitable  distribution  of income and wealth,   at   least for   short   periods.   Scheidel's   answer is   that, although most societies throughout human history have generally supported sharp distributional  inequities,  yes,  some  societies  have seen this  pervasive  inequality, but unfortunately only as the result of major, devastating, violent shocks. 

Scheidel further offers a taxonomy of such shocks, which he dubs the 4 Horsemen:

* 1. Mass Mobilization Warfare; 

* 2. Transformative Revolution; 

* 3. State Failure/Collapse; 

* 4. Lethal Pandemics. 

These forces  of  devastation  and  death  have  come  in  varying  form  and  scale throughout  history,  from  the  collapse  of  Bronze  Age  palace  societies in  the eastern  Mediterranean to  the  Bubonic  Plague of  western  Europe and  the  World Wars,  but  in  their  own  way  each  of  these  violent  shocks carried  at  least  the potential side-effect    of    disrupting and    demolishing    established    political hierarchies   and   socio-economic   systems,   thereby   providing   space   for   more equitable  societies  to  emerge.  Scheidel  is  quick  to  note  that  these  forces  do  not always serve to reduce inequality, and even when they do this has generally been short-lived,  but  the  thrust  of  this  lengthy  survey  of  global  inequality  is  that "Across  recorded  history,  the  periodic  compressions  of  inequality  brought  about by   mass   mobilization   warfare,   transformative   revolution,   state   failure,   and pandemics  have  invariably  dwarfed  any  known  instances  of  equalization  by entirely  peaceful  means (443).

...

One quibble with the work is  that,  all  together,  the  sheer  quantity  of  information deployed in the  relentless service  of  a fairly  small number  of central arguments can come  off  as somewhat repetitive. More   significantly,   while The  Great Leveler can   and   should   be considered   a   work   of   quantitative   history—and   for   this,   Scheidel   is   to   be commended — cliodynamicists  and readers  of Cliodynamics may  hope  for  a  more explicit  laying  out  of  hypotheses  and  systematic  assessment  of  the  empirical evidence both for and against than is offered. Reading the work, I sometimes felt that the  force  of  the primary arguments would  have  been  strengthened  by reducing the  number  of  cases  adduced,  leaving  room  to balance  these  positive exempla with more thorough and systematic treatment of the full implications of the  proposed  causal  mechanism.”

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0hb2v9j1)



Source: Citation: Hoyer,  Daniel.  2018. Pulling a  Little  Optimism  Out  of  a  Very  Grim  Account  of Global Inequality. A Review of The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from  the  Stone  Age  to the  Twenty-First  Century by   Walter   Scheidel   (Princeton University Press, 2017). Cliodynamics9: 130–142


=Discussion=

Daniel Hoyer:

"Are the  prospects  for  a  more  egalitarian  future  really  this  bleak? Are  we simply caught   between either accepting high   (and   likely growing)global inequality, or  hoping  for the  next major  catastrophe to  strike? The Great Leveler certainly makes this argument forcefully and often. Happily, there is further room for  optimism  in  the  pages  of The Great Leveler. Tucked away in the details of the Horsemen's devastating impact on human life, Scheidel introduces a contributing factor to the subsequent reductions in inequality separated(at least in part) from the   devastation: institutional  reform  and  state  intervention. Time   and   again, mediating factors in the leveling process leading from violent shock to reduction of  inequality are  brought  up.  Outlining  Japan's  'great  compression'  after  World War II, for instance, Scheidel notes that the US occupying forces oversaw a major restructuring of Japan's economy, introducing labour and wage protections and a more progressive taxation system among other policies aimed at leveling income and  wealth  distribution  (123–9).  Scheidel  concludes  this  section  on  post-war Japan  with  the  observation  that  "The  bloodiest  years  in  Japanese  history,  a  war that cost millions of lives and visited enormous destruction on the homeland, had produced a uniquely equalizing outcome (129).”But was it the war that did this, or  was  it  the  interventions,  fiscal  reforms,  and  changes  to  the  financial  system that produced this 'uniquely equalizing outcome'? Similarly,   when   discussing   the   path   that   led   Northern   Europe   from   the devastation  of  World  War  II  to  producing  some  of  the  current  world's  most egalitarian  countries,  Scheidel  explains  that  the relatively equitable  distribution of income and wealth currently enjoyed in Scandinavia compared with the rest of the   world,   including   other   parts   of   Europe, owes   to   their relatively   radical taxation  and  social  welfare  spending.  These  fiscal  policies  and  the  institutions supporting  such  state-led  redistribution,  in  turn,  are said  to  have  resulted  from the war; such policies had been advocated for years, but "[m]ass mobilization war served  as  the  catalyst  that  helped turn  these  ideals  into  reality (164).”A fair point,  but  one  that again raises  the  question  of whether both factors  were necessary    for Scandinavia's    reduced    inequality; and    if    so,    should mass mobilization  warfare  get  all  the  headlines,  when  institutional  reforms4were  at least as responsible? Again, while  digesting  the  overwhelming  evidence  presented  in The  Great Leveler for the correlation between violent shock and inequality reduction, a key question keeps popping up: What exactly is the relationship between the putative cause  and  effect? At  times  reading  the  work,  it  seems  that the  relationship between these   two   potential   causal   factors   (violence   and subsequent policy reform)  in  fact  explains the  outcomes  observed  and  documented  by  Scheidel, rather  than  the  shocks  alone.  The nature  of  this  interaction  may account  for the ostensible  outliers,  as  well  as the  relative  difference  in  equality  achieved  by different  countries today. Indeed,  Scheidel  notes  at  one  point  that  "the  more balanced  distribution  of final  incomes  that  is  typical  of  the [modern]  Eurozone and Scandinavia  primarily  depends  on  the maintenance  of  an  expansive  and expensive  system  of  powerfully  equalizing  state  interventions(425).” Scheidel goes  on  to  explain  that such  policy  is  "unsustainable (426)”in  the  long  term, although  again  without  too  much  empirical  documentation5.  Nevertheless,  the state  interventions  get  pride  of  place  in  explaining  the  relative  high  equality enjoyed  by  northern  Europe  today  compared  to  the  rest  of  the  world—but  why are  the  conclusions  focused  entirely  on  the  effects  of  violent  shock?  And  if  the shocks  are the  principal  factor,  why  did  the  greater  violence  experienced  in western and southern Europe not lead to correspondingly greater or more lasting equality there? The  interaction  between  these  causal  forces appears to  be  key,  not  only because  the  mediation  of  institutional  reform  after  some  exogenous  shock  adds another  dimension  to  the  resulting  leveling,  but  because  it  can  help  to  uncover the continuous relationship between the degree and scope of the factors involved. For  instance, are  there thresholds  of  devastation  (loss  of  life  or  capital  from  war or  state  collapse  or  pandemics)  or  a  certain  percentage  of  the  available  labour force mobilized for warfare that need to be reached in order for leveling to occur? Are  there  temporal  bounds  for  the  effects  of violent  shocks?  For example,  at several points Scheidel notes that the Great Compression of the mid-20thcentury has  largely  eroded,  as  the  century's  latter  decades  saw  resurgent  inequality explode   almost   everywhere   in   the   world,   but   the   reason   for   this   is   largely unexplained. Is there a shelf-life to the egalitarian reforms instituted in the 1940s and   1950s   and,   if   so,   why,   exactly, are   such   reforms   so   transient? Do   the systematic   removal   of   redistributive   policies   during   the   heyday   of   'liberal' economics during   the   1970s   and   1980s completely explain why   the   Great Compression of the mid 20thcentury has been unraveling?"

(https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0hb2v9j1)

[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]