

=Description=

Umair Haque:

"The more connected we are, the more feedback matters — because when we're all connected what I do is more likely to feed back onto you.Viral effects are a form of feedback. Viral effects aren't about "viral marketing". They're about the transmission of stuff from one actor to another — in a classic increasing returns pattern: 2 people, 4 people, 16 people, 256 people (you can pick your own exponent). That stuff can be flu bugs — or better stuff, like information, reputation, money...anything. The sky's the limit in a hyperconnected world."
(http://blogs.harvardbusiness.org/haque/2009/04/the_age_of_feedback.html)


=Discussion=

Umair Haque:

"The problem?

Economics 1.0 can lead to destructive viral effects. The banking crisis happened because banks got the flu. We couldn't foresee it because we couldn't factor viral effects into risk: the costs of your counterparty's counterparty's counterparty's defaulting, triggering a cascade of mounting value destruction. What were the odds? The banks put them at one in billions. Reality put it at closer to one.

Strategy 1.0 can lead to destructive viral effects. Dominate, coerce profit. But what happens to your suppliers' supplier — and your suppliers' buyers, complementors, and customers? That's the story of the Gap. It's reliance on cheap, low-cost labour was source of cost advantage yesterday — but once the viral effects of underinvestment and a blind eye to labour standards spread throughout Gap's value chain, the disease was chronic. Today, the Gap can't seem to produce clothes worth buying at any price.

Yet, feedback can also be deeply constructive.

Viral effects are a path to radical strategic innovation. Wanna get radical? Stop thinking about products, services, and processes. Ask instead how you can get viral, not just in terms of marketing, but in terms of production, distribution, pricing, logistics, or even service.Sound like sci-fi? Think again. While most businesses are blind to the power of viral effects, here's a killer example from...Kenya. Using M-Pesa, a mobile phone service, Kenyans can instantly transfer funds to and from one another. Now there's a viral effect that's awesome: it is at the heart of a better kind of business that makes people authentically better off."
(http://blogs.harvardbusiness.org/haque/2009/04/the_age_of_feedback.html)


=Examples=

Umair Haque:

"Today's revolutionaries are able to leverage feedback as a new source of advantage. Google destroyed big media with feedback. Apple destroyed record labels with feedback. Zara and Threadless crushed the Gap with feedback. Obama eviscerated McCain with feedback. And, of course, Safaricom is finally using feedback constructively — instead of destructively — in banking."
(http://blogs.harvardbusiness.org/haque/2009/04/the_age_of_feedback.html)


[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Relational]]