

=Discussion=

Keith Button:

'Measured in real-world U.S. dollars, virtual transactions total $2.1 billion a year in the U.S. and $7.3 billion globally, according to Sometrics' founder and chief executive, Ian Swanson. That is up 61% since 2008.

"It's growing fast. It's only picked up steam as more and more companies are getting into the virtual currency market," Swanson says. His El Segundo, Calif., companyworks with 450 video game companies serving 250 million game players in 180 countries. Amex is expected to build out virtual currency platforms in other industries, capitalizing on its merchant relationships.

Virtual currency is a broad category that can include everything from the money used in online games to digital currencies used to by real-world goods to Starbucks points.

Video gameplayers use actual money to buy virtual-world units of currency. The units are then set aside in an account to be used to buy items while playing the game — virtual armor, clothes, farm animals or real estate, for example. Facebook users buy Facebook Credits, priced at 10 cents a piece, to fund an account that is debited as the user buys from applications on Facebook. Microsoft sells Microsoft Points for users of its Xbox LIVE.

Bitcoin is digital currency that can be used for real-world peer-to-peer purchases, as well as for currency speculation, just like the exchange-rate traders. Starbucks points, airline miles and other loyalty programs could also fit the virtual currency definition.

The developing field of virtual currency has caught a lot of regulators and banks by surprise, says Alistair Newton, a Gartner banking analyst. But the banking and financial services companies, starting with the credit card companies,are waking up to the business threat and the market opportunity, he says.

The Amex acquisition is one example. Another is Visa Inc.'s February purchase of PlaySpan Inc., a virtual-goods payment platform, for $190 million.

Where do banks fit in? As banks look to develop strong and immediate relationships with their customers, they could present themselves as stores of value, where the customer could deposit airline miles and Facebook Credits in accounts alongside his savings account and checking account, Newton says.

A customer waiting in line at a Wal-Mart could decide, with the help of a mobile phone application and his bank-kept accounts, how best to use points or a debit card account to make a purchase.

Online gaming currencies make up a subcategory that "may still stay ring-fenced," but loyalty points and other forms of virtual currency that can be used to purchase tangible goodscould spill out into real-world banking, Newton says."
(http://www.americanbanker.com/btn/24_11/virtual-currencies-real-potential-1043673-1.html)


[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]