
=Description=

"The AFL, MoveOn, and other involved organizations will be busing their members and friends into New York City for the event. Organizers are predicted an estimate 10,000 in-person marchers. But '''a "virtual march" component will attempt to get people not physically on the ground invested in the experience'''. Many marches these days have a virtual component, but here organizers say they are attempting to make the experience something more than an exercise in email address collection. "Virtual marchers" who registered their names and hometowns online are having stickers printed in their honor. Those stickers will be stuck on signs, said AFL-CIO Online Mobilization Coordinator Marc Laitin, and carried down from City Hall Park to the famous Wall Street bull by marchers in the streets. "The idea is for people not there to really feel like they're participating," said Laitin, "and for the people marching to think that there are other people marching alongside them.

"We're trying to create an experience for people who can't be at the rally," says Krebs. "We're trying to capture the feel, to give a sense of where there is more than one thing happening at once. You go to a rally, and there are people with signs, and then you turn and there are cops, and it's all exciting." He laughs. "The challenge is that live mobile streaming is not great." To prepare, Krebs says he canvassed the march route in preparation yesterday, running speed tests on hot spots. Will City Hall Park's wifi or AT&T's cellular hookups be able to support streaming video? Maybe! Krebs is hopeful that any resulting choppiness only adds to the cinéma vérité feel of the whole thing. And if one stream fails, there will be other cell phones and mini cameras filling in the gaps." 
(http://techpresident.com/blog-entry/art-science-and-coalition-politics-pulling-modern-multimedia-march-wall-street?)


[[Category:Politics]]