
=Description=

"While embeddedness in formal organizations and networks declines, embeddedness in liquid - often virtual - structures grows, accelerated by ever renewing ICTs. These developments - individualization processes amplified by ICTs - are, of course, not without consequences for contentious politics. ICTs’ capability to create networks has arguably the biggest effects for organizers, because it impacts on social embeddedness; a key factor for mobilization (Klandermans, van der Toorn, and van Stekelenburg 2008; Van Stekelenburg and Klandermans 2010). Social media sites such as Facebook and MySpace play a vital role because they significantly reinforce existing social networks, while simultaneously allowing people to connect with those who hold different views (Norris 2004). These sites - which have attracted millions of users worldwide since their introduction - make it possible to be connected with hundreds of people who share interests and activities across political and geographic borders. Individual-level virtual network bridging - virtual brokers - explains how the speed and scale of protest may occur in contexts with relatively low levels of formal organizational brokerage and conventional leadership (cf. Bennett, Breunig and Givens, 2008). What makes social media sites unique is not that they allow individuals to virtually or in reality meet strangers, but rather that they enable users to publicly display their connections and make visible their social networks (Boyd and Ellison 2007). This public display of connections is a crucial component of social networks sites which can result in connections between individuals that would not otherwise be made. As such, the internet created an additional public sphere; people are nowadays embedded in virtual networks in addition to (in)formal physical networks. This is important and relevant in the context of mobilization, because the more people are socially embedded - formal, informal and virtual - the higher the chances that they will be targeted with a mobilizing message and kept to their promises to participate and the more they participate in protest. As such individualization processes amplified by ICTs made virtual embeddedness - in addition to formal and informal embeddedness - a key factor for mobilization."
(http://www.hivos.net/Hivos-Knowledge-Programme/Themes/The-Changing-Face-of-Citizen-Action/News/Occupy-Wall-Street-London-Amsterdam-occupy-occupy-everywhere)


[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]