= technological format with great potential for greener computing

=Definition=

"In computing, virtualization is a broad term that refers to the abstraction of computer resources. One useful definition is "a technique for hiding the physical characteristics of computing resources from the way in which other systems, applications, or end users interact with those resources. This includes making a single physical resource (such as a server, an operating system, an application, or storage device) appear to function as multiple logical resources; or it can include making multiple physical resources (such as storage devices or servers) appear as a single logical resource."
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtualization)


=Discussion=

Virtualization as a strategy for [http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/Green-Computing Green Computing]:

"The promising new concept of "Internet virtualization," which may considerably reduce the power consumption of routers, switches, and computers. Researchers are now talking about building virtual computers, networks, routers, and switches as a key architectural feature of the future Internet. Initiatives from the National Science Foundation, the Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI), and User Controlled Light Paths (UCLP) are all based around the concept of representing physical resources such as computers, networks, and routers as independent virtual resources.  

Virtualization permits multiple, independently managed networks and virtual organizations to exist on a common high-energy-efficiency network substrate. It will allow all the modern advantages of intelligence and control at the edge to be maintained. New applications and services -- such as peer-to-peer and Web 2.0 -- can be deployed by users without getting permission of the owners of the underlying substrate.

Large, centralized, and extremely efficient ICT equipment using renewable sources of energy, such as wind and solar power, may be the future physical architecture of the Internet. No one wants to go back to the bad old days of large, centralized mainframes and carrier networks.  

The bottom line is that the future Internet represents an incredible leadership opportunity for Internet researchers and corporations to find new solutions and create new business opportunities in terms of reducing global warming, one of the greatest challenges facing this country, if not this planet."
(http://www.internetevolution.com/author.asp?section_id=506&doc_id=140273&)


=More Information=

#[[Green Grid]]
#[[Green Broadband]]
#[[Follow the Energy Computing Grids]]



[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Ecology]]