(from [[Vocabulary of Commons]])


==Glossary==

{| class="wikitable"
!Term
!Explanation
|-
|ADB
|Asian Development Bank.
|-
|Adivasi
|
Indigenous and tribal people.
Literally ‘first dweller’.
Used as a term of political assertion since the government of India maintains that there are no indigenous people in India and that the Schedule Tribe list is only an administrative list from which communities can be taken off or added.
This term is not used in the Northeast, where the terms ‘indigenous and tribal people’ or ‘tribal’ are preferred.
In this book we have retained the preferences of the authors for each chapter—which leads to the terms being used interchangeably.
|-
|
Anganwadi
|
Government terminology for day care centre for children.
The centre is important since government schemes for children, especially health (immunisation) and nutrition are routed through these centres.
It is a lifeline for those below poverty line, as most Dalit children are.
|-
|
Azan
|
Islamic call to prayer.
|-
|
Babu
|
Government official (Colloquial).
|-
|
Bada
|
Fruit cultivation area.
|-
|
Bada mahana dangu
|
Graveyard for elders.
|-
|
Bagada
|
Area from which minor forest produced are collected.
|-
|
Balwadi
|
Common term for anganwadi.
|-
|
Baru
|
When soru panga is used as a village.
|-
|
Basa
|
Place of shelter, social gathering or festival.
|-
|
BBMP
|
Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (Greater Bengaluru Metropolitan Council)
|-
|
Bengaluru
|
Formerly Bangalore.
|-
|
BOD
|
Biological Oxygen Demand, a measure for water purity.
|-
|
CBD
|
Convention on Biodiversity.
|-
|
Chennai
|
Formerly Madras.
|-
|
Chuana
|
Bank of river where from water is used.
|-
|
COD
|
Chemical Oxygen Demand, a measure for water purity.
|-
|
Common school system
|
One school system from village to nation in primary and high school education without any discrimination. It should be free from private management and commercialisation of education.
|-
|
CPI
|
Communist Party of India.
|-
|
CPI(M)
|
Communist Party of India (Marxist).
|-
|
CPR
|
Common Pool Resources (In popular Indian usage commonly Common Property Resources).
|-
|
Crore
|
10 million.
|-
|
CRZ
|
Coastal Regulation Zone.
|-
|
CZM
|
Coastal Zone Management.
|-
|
Dalit
|
Former ‘untouchables’ outside the Hindu caste system. The government has classified some of them as Scheduled Castes. Dalit means ‘broken’ or ‘oppressed’ and is a term of assertion.
|-
|
Dangar
|
Land used for millet cultivation.
|-
|
Dharani penu
|
Earth god.
|-
|
DPT
|
The Doctrine of Public Trust. It is a legal principle which asserts that certain natural resources are of such immense value to society as a whole then it is unjustifiable to assign those natural resources to any individual as property.
|-
|
Elu basa
|
Individual house.
|-
|
Elu gunjare
|
Village with humans, animals, kitchen gardens, livestock shelter.
|-
|
Eyu penu/Gangi penu
|
Water deity.
|-
|
FAO
|
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the UN.
|-
|
FRA
|
Forest Rights Act, the common usage for The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006.
|-
|
GATS
|
General Agreement on Trade and Services.
|-
|
GoI
|
Government of India.
|-
|
Gram sabha
|
Village assembly.
Decision making authority consisting of all adult members of the village recognised by the Indian constitution and the Forest Rights Act.
|-
|
Hata
|
Village fair and market.
|-
|
IFA
|
Indian Forest Act.
|-
|
IMF
|
International Monetary Fund.
|-
|
INGO
|
International Non Government Organisation.
|-
|
IPC
|
Indian Penal Code.
|-
|
IPR
|
Intellectual Property Rights.
|-
|
IT
|
Information Technology.
|-
|
ITPGR
|
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources.
|-
|
KSMTF
|
Kerala Swatantra Matsya Thozhilali Federation, the Kerala independent fish workers federation.
|-
|
Kolkatta
|
Formerly Calcutta.
|-
|
Lakh
|
100,000.
|-
|
Mandiarani parba
|
A festival.
|-
|
MDG
|
The United Nations Millennium Development Goals.
|-
|
Melia parba
|
A festival.
|-
|
MFP
|
Minor Forest Produce. The preferred term is NTFP, though the forest department keeps to this term. The terminology MFP hides the fact that these ‘minor’ products are substantial sources of patronage and income. In popular usage these two terms are used interchangeably.
|-
|
Mila mahana dangu
|
Graveyard for children.
|-
|
MLA
|
Member of Legislative Assembly.
|-
|
MNC
|
Multinational Corporation.
|-
|
MoEF
|
Ministry of Environment and Forests.
|-
|
Mumbai
|
Formerly Bombay
|-
|
Munda, kata, bandha
|
Traditional water preservation and irrigation method of tribals.
|-
|
Naxalite
|
Extremist or Maoist in popular usage. They are a banned radical far Left Maoist Communist group in India. The name comes from the village of Naxalbari in the Indian state of West Bengal where the movement originated.
|-
|
Naju basa
|
Village with humans, animals, kitchen gardens, livestock shelter.
|-
|
Nella
|
When soru seed is used for cultivation.
|-
|
NFF
|
National Fish Workers’ Forum.
|-
|
NGO
|
Non Government Organisation.
|-
|
Niyam raja
|
God of law.
|-
|
NTFP
|
Non Timber Forest Produce. More precise, but used interchangeably with MFP in common parlance.
|-
|
Odisha
|
Eastern state of India, formerly Orissa.
|-
|
Pano
|
One of the scheduled caste communities.
|-
|
PDS
|
Public distribution system for sale of food grains and groceries through fair price shops commonly called ration shops.
|-
|
Penu
|
Good.
|-
|
PESA
|
Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act 1996.
|-
|
Pourakarmikas
|
Persons who clean roads, sewage pipes and storm water drains and collect garbage.
|-
|
Sabha
|
Assembly.
|-
|
Safaikarmacharis
|
People who clean human waste (night soil in dry toilets).
Manual scavengers.
|-
|
Salwa judum
|
Literally ‘purification hunt’, a militia armed by the Government of Chhatisgarh ostensibly to fight the Maoists, but in reality committed atrocities on the tribals and therefore ordered to be disbanded by the Supreme Court.
|-
|
Santhe
|
Market (Kannada).
|-
|
SC
|
Scheduled Castes. It is an administrative classification of the Government of India. (see also Dalit).
|-
|
SEZ
|
Special Economic Zone.
|-
|
Shifting cultivation
|
Tribals shift their cultivation to different places from time to time.
|-
|
Sixth Schedule
|
The Sixth Schedule of the Indian Constitution provides for the creation of Autonomous District Councils (ADCs) in certain tribal areas of Northeast India. The ADCs have power to make laws over land, forest, water, agriculture, education, health and social issues. The primary purpose of the sixth schedule is to incorporate the predominantly tribal populations, as communities, into the Indian State. For further information on the Sixth Schedule refer: B. L. Hansaria. ''The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution of India. A Study.'' Gauhati: Ashok Publishers.
|-
|
Soru jaka
|
Hill top.
|-
|
Soru need
|
Lower hill slope.
|-
|
Soru panga
|
Land at hill base.
|-
|
Soru tude
|
Middle of the hill slope.
|-
|
ST
|
Scheduled Tribes, the indigenous communities. ST is an administrative classification of the Government of India. (see also Adivasi).
|-
|
Tedibasa
|
Place to sit and have conversations.
|-
|
Thiruvananthapuram
|
Formerly Trivandrum, Capital of Kerala in South India.
|-
|
TRIPS
|
Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights.
|-
|
WTO
|
World Trade Organisation.
|-
|
Yama
|
God of death.
|-
|
Yamaloka
|
Literally Yama’s world, but ‘hell’ in normal usage.
|}