(to [[Vocabulary of Commons]])

<div style="margin-left:2em;text-indent:-2em">

Anungla '''''Aier''''' (anunglaaier(at)gmail.com), Associate professor of Anthropology in Kohima Science College Kohima, Nagaland, Formerly worked as Director of Women’s Studies Centre in Nagaland University, Kohima.
She has been actively working among the tribes of Nagaland for many years.
Her main research areas are in the fields of folklore, cultural analysis, customary laws and gender relations among the Nagas.
She has also worked in the area of indigenous knowledge and crafts of some tribes of Nagaland.

Gomathy '''''Balasubramanian''''' (gomathynb(at)gmail.com) is an Assistant Professor at the Tata Institute of Social Sciences.
She has been an Independent Researcher at the International Collective for the Support of Fishworkers, ATREE, FLAME-TAO Knoware Pvt. Ltd and ActionAid Asia, Programme Manager at Junior Achievement India, Learning Historian at Bhavishya Alliance and Change Management Consultant at Oxfam India.
opadh ya 

Ritajyoti '''''Bandyopadhyay''''' (ritajyoti1981(at)yahoo.com) is a Urban Historian who studied in Jadavpur University, Centre for Sudies in Social Sciences, Kolkatta, El Colegio de Mexico, Mexico and University of California, Berkeley.
He is currently associated with the National Institute of Advanced Studies, Bengaluru.
He has worked on urban activism, urban space and urban retail.
His work has been published in journals like Dialectical Anthropology, Sociological Research Online, Estudios de Asia y Africa and Economic and Political Weekly.

Dr Solomon '''''Benjamin''''' (Solly.benjamin(at)gmail.com) is an Associate Professor at the National Institute of Advanced Studies (NIAS) and co–chairs their Urban Research and Policy Program (URPP).
Benjamin’s research over the last decade looks at cities and towns under globalisation, issues of urban poverty, politics and economy and a particular interest in land development.
His recent work looks at Indian and Chinese urbanism, while at NIAS he coordinates a research on Bengaluru’s wetlands, their local governance and economy.

Dr Gita '''''Bharali''''' (gitabharali09(at)gmail.com) is Director of Research, North Eastern Social Research Centre, Guwahati, Assam, India.

Mihir R '''''Bhatt''''' (mihir(at)aidmi.org) works on community based disaster risk management research and pilots in six states of India with All India Disaster Mitigation Institute (aidmi.org) since 1995.
Currently he is reviewing UNDP’s contribution to disaster preparedness and recovery.

Anita '''''Cheria''''' (office(at)openspace.org.in) Director, OpenSpace Bengaluru.
Is a writer–activist, working on issues of human rights and development.

Dr. Hrangthan '''''Chhungi''''' (chhungiecc(at)gmail.com) Executive Secretary, Commission on Tribal and Adivasi, National Council of Churches in India (NCCI);.
Executive Member as Honorary Treasurer of the Society for Biblical Studies of India (SBSI); A Biblical theologian and Church leader with concern for the uplift and empowerment of the tribals, Dalits, women and those who are socially ostracised and oppressed.

Ashok '''''Chowdhury''''' (ashok.chowdhury(at)gmail.com) is a veteran in the field of social development, involved in unorganized sector labour movements and organizing forest workers.
In the 1980s he initiated the forest workers cooperative along the Shivalik ranges, off Sahranpur in UP.
In the 1990s he was key member in the foundation and formation of the National Centre for Labour.
He is the founding member of the National Forum of Forest People and Forest Dwellers.
With the Uttar Pradesh land rights network since 1997; Vice president of the New Trade Union Initiative (NTUI) since inception in 2001; Participated in the formation of Sangarsh since 2007
a common platform for campaigns working on community rights over common resources.

'''''Edwin''''' (office(at)openspace.org.in) Director, OpenSpace Bengaluru.
Is a writer, working on issues of human rights and development.

Dr Walter '''''Fernandes''''' (walter.nesrc(at)gmail.com) is Director, North Eastern Social Research Centre, Guwahati, Assam, India.

Enakshi '''''Ganguly Thukral''''' (enakshi.ganguly(at)gmail.com) is the Founder and Co–director of HAQ Centre for Child Rights.
She is a development researcher and a human rights activist having worked on socio–legal issues related to development related to displacement, women and children.

Venkatesh '''''Hariharan''''' (venkyh(at)gmail.com) has been involved with open source software since 1999 when he co–founded IndiaLinux.org, a non– profit that localised Linux and related software to the Hindi language.
He maintains a blog on open source and open standards at www.osindia.blogspot.com.
Hariharan is a former Executive Editor of Express Computer and the first Indian to be selected for the prestigious Knight Science Journalism Fellowship (1998–99) at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
At Express Computer, Hariharan interviewed some of the leading figures in the world of technology including Microsoft’s Bill Gates, John Gage of Sun Microsystems and many others.
He has written for leading Indian and international publications including MIT Technology Review, Upside, Slashdot, Economic Times, Times of India and many others.
He currently works for a leading open source software company on public policy issues like open standards and software patents.

Dr Geeta '''''Lakshmi''''' (geetavenktesh(at)yahoo.co.in) is a Ph.D in Political Science.
After completing her doctorate in 2001 she has worked in couple of NGOs and Research Associate in Madras Institute of Developmental Studies from 2005 to 2009.
Her area of interest is environmental issues, especially, water, coastal environment, climate change and related issues.
She has authored many research papers reflecting these issues.
Presently she works as a freelance researcher.

Samar Bosu '''''Mullick''''' (sanjay_samar(at)hotmail.com) (also known as Sanjay) was involved in the Left political movement from 1968 to 1975; the Jharkhand separate state movement in 1976 and held a leading position till 1995; National consultant of the Indian Confederation of Indigenous and Tribal Peoples (ICITP) since its inception in 1987 till 1995.
Founder member of the Jharkhand Jangal Bachao Andolan; a convener of the National Forum of the Forest People and Forest Workers (NFFPFW); Taught in Xavier Institute of Social Service, Ranchi, Jharkhand from 1986 to 2004; Senior Fellow at the Anthropological Survey of India, Eastern Region, Government of India (1991 to 1992).
Head of the department of study and research with the William Carey Study and Research Centre (1986 to 2004).
Presently associate director of the Bindrai Institute for Research Study and Action, Ranchi; director of Institute of Community Forest Governance, Ranchi.

C R '''''Neelakandan''''' (crneelakandan(at)gmail.com) has been involved in various struggles like Silent Valley, Plachimada (against Coca Cola factory), Enron (proposed at Kannur), Express Highway, Smart City, Various Hydel Projects, Mineral Sand Mining and many other small and large destructive Development projects and supports various struggle groups in forming the strategies to interact with the so called ‘Main Stream’.
He writes in various periodicals and dailies on LPG policies and their effects on society.
Was awarded the Oorja Kerala Award for the best article in a year on the Power situation in Kerala instituted by KSEB Officers Association.(2000) and the Evurath Krishnan Nair Award for the Social Activist of the year (2003).

Roshni '''''Nuggehalli''''' (roshni.cwc(at)gmail.com) works with The Concerned for Working Children on issues of child rights, migrants’ rights and decentralised governance.
She is a member of Hasiru Usiru, a network of citizens and NGOs working on conservation of public commons, open spaces and greenery in Bengaluru.

Dr Melvil '''''Pereira''''' (melvillesj(at)gmail.com) is Administrator and Research Associate at North Eastern Social Research Centre, Guwahati, India.

Prabir '''''Purkayasthsa''''' (prabirp(at)gmail.com) is the President, Centre of Technology and Development; Chairperson, Knowledge Commons; Vice– President, Delhi Science Forum and a consultant on technology and research development for the power sector.
He writes extensively on policy issues with regard to science, technology, power and telecommunications; regular contributions over the years to magazines and journals such as Frontline and Economic and Political Weekly; Co–author, Uncle Sam’s Nuclear Cabin (Leftword, 2007) and Enron Blowout: Corporate Capitalism and Theft of the Global Commons (Leftword, 2002).

M C '''''Raj''''' (mcraj.reds(at)gmail.com) hails from an unseeable community in South India and has self–actualised himself as an international opinion leader through also timely external support.
He has written 15 books and heads
a Dalit Movement in Karnataka.
He has initiated a Campaign for Electoral Reforms in India (CERI) to bring about Proportionate Electoral System and has convened the first ever Round Table of the World Parliament of Indigenous Peoples in Tumkur.

Dr Bhuvaneswari '''''Raman''''', (raman.bhuvaneswari(at)gmail.com) is an independent researcher based in India.
She holds a PhD in Social Policy from the London School of Economic and Political Science.
Her research interests are in the areas of urban poverty, governance and property.

Kavita '''''Ratna''''' (kavitaratna(at)gmail.com) is the Director Communications of the Concerned for Working Children (www.workingchild.org).
For two decades she has been working on issues related to child labour, children’s rights, developmental communication, civil society participation and political decentralisation.

'''''Roma''''' (romasnb(at)gmail.com) has been working as a social activist on the issue of forest /land /wages/gender with Dalit, Adivasi and minority sections for the last 18 years.
Presently working in Uttar Pradesh, on the issue of land/forest/tribal/displacement, strengthening the local initiative, people’s organisation and helping to form strong women’s leadership and leadership from Dalits and tribals/Adivasi.
Associated with the Uttar Pradesh Land Reform and Labour Rights Campaign Committee (UPLRCC) and New Trade Union Initiative (NTUI).
Nominated as people’s organisation representative in the State Level Monitoring Committee constituted under Forest Rights Act, Uttar Pradesh; Steering committee member of National Forum of Forest People and Forest Workers (NFFPFW) and Specialist Member, Joint Review Committee, constituted by MoEF and MoTa GoI on Forest Rights Act to review the implementation of the Forest Rights Act in the country.

Dr Nidhi Sadana '''''Sabharwal''''', (nidhi(at)dalitstudies.org.in) currently works at the Indian Institute of Dalit Studies, New Delhi.
She has a PhD from Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, with a specialisation in economic geography, and has significant experience in social development and inclusion, caste and economic discrimination, rural poverty and the incidence of child labour.
She has extensive experience in data collection and analysis and in advocacy/influencing policy actions.
Nidhi has published several articles on socioeconomic issues in rural India, many focusing on the vulnerable sections of society and has actively worked on key issues affecting the poor and vulnerable in India, through organisations based in India and the UK.

Dr. Suman '''''Sahai''''' (mail(at)genecampaign.org) has had a distinguished scientific career in the field of genetics and was honoured with the 2004 Borlaug Award for her outstanding contribution to agriculture and the environment.
Dr. Sahai has served on the faculty at the Universities of Alberta and Chicago and the University of Heidelberg.
She returned to India to organise the Gene Campaign, an NGO dedicated to protecting farmers’ rights and food and livelihood security.
She was appointed Knight of the Golden Ark (Netherlands) in 2001.
She has published extensively on science policy and food security issues, Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) and Ag biotechnology, and has been working both at the grassroots and policy levels, with considerable impact.
She is a member of several national policy forums on international trade, biodiversity and environment, biotechnology and bioethics, intellectual property rights and research and education.
Dr Sahai chaired the Planning Commission Task Force on ‘Agro biodiversity and Genetically Engineered Organisms’, for the Eleventh Plan.

Prafulla '''''Samantara''''' (psamantara(at)rediffmail.com) has been an active participant in democratic movements since his student days.
He was in the ‘Total Revolution’ movement led by Loknayak Jayaprakash Narayan in the 1970s and was imprisoned for one year during national emergency in 1975–77.
Currently, he is the president of Lokshakti Abhiyan of Odisha, campaigning against globalisation and for alternative development.
He is one of the convenors of National Alliance of Peoples’ Movements .
He is columnist and editing fortnightly Odiya journal ‘Swabhiman’.
He has written books on peoples’ right over resources and displacement.
Now he is actively involved in various peoples’ movements against displacement in Odisha.

Kinjal '''''Sampat''''' (kinjalsampat(at)gmail.com) is a researcher currently working with CSTEP (Centre for Science, Technology, Environment and Policy) and on a research commissioned by the Knowledge Commission Karnataka.
Her research interests are sociology of law, political economy and people’s movements in India.
She has an MA (sociology) from Delhi School of Economics and has worked with Lokniti, a political think–tank at the Centre for Study of Developing Societies (CSDS) and associated with the National Alliance for People’s Movements (NAPM).

K P '''''Sasi''''' (kpsasi36(at)gmail.com) is an award winning film director and social activist.
He promotes socially relevant communication through the visual medium.
Using films and documentaries, he attempts to support and strengthen struggles related to Adivasis, fisherfolk, Dalits, women, sexuality minorities and ethnic minorities, and struggles against communalism and corporate crime.
He has won several awards for his documentaries, some of which are Best Documentary Award, 3rd Swaralaya International Film Festival; Best Film Award, International Rural Film Festival , France; Special Jury Prize, International Environment Film Festival, Turkey; Bronze Award, Global Video Festival, Copenhagen and Best film Award, Enfest.

Dr. Mira '''''Shiva''''' (mirashiva(at)gmail.com) is a physician (MD Medicine, Christian Medical College, Ludhiana)  working on issues related to health.
She is Coordinator, Initiative for Health Equity and Society/Third World Network, Founder Member & Steering Committee member of Diverse Women for Diversity, Peoples’ Health Movement, Health Action International–Asia Pacific, South Asian Focal Point–International Peoples’ Health Council.
She was member Central Council for Health, GoI., Chairperson Consumer Education Taskforce on Safety of Food & Medicine MOH), Member Health Committee National Human Rights Commission, was Member Central Ethical Committee on Biomedical Research (ICMR); Director–Women & Health, Rational Drug Policy Head Public Policy in VHAI; Founder Coordinator All India Drug Action Network.
She is steering Committee Member of FORCES, Right To Food Campaign, Doctors for Food & Bio–safety; She has authored, edited co–edited several books National Profile on Women Health & Development, Towards Comprehensive women’s Health Policy
& Programmes, Banned & Bannable Drugs, Darkness at Noon, Rational TB care, training &educational material on women’s health, gender justice etc, She is recipient of Dr Olle Hansson Award 1986 for her contribution nationally & globally in rational drug use & showing moral courage, also Women Scientist Award on International Women’s day from Dept of Science
& Technology 2005 for her work against Misuse of Medicines & Medical Technology; Recipient of the Genova; Una donna fuori dal coro award (Genoa: A woman standing out from the Crowd) for playing ‘a key role in the fight for the right to health and standing up for the weak and protecting them from the pharmaceutical lobbies’.

Deepak '''''Srinivasan''''' (deep.srin(at)gmail.com)  Artist, media practitioner, 
researcher, facilitator.
As researcher, artist and media practitioner Deepak is currently a member of Maraa, a media & arts collective based in Bengaluru and faculty at Srishti School of Art, Design and Technology, Bengaluru.
After a Bachelor’s degree in environmental sciences and a Master’s degree in neurobiology, his interests shifted to arts and education and the role of expression and art in creative human development.
Since 2005, he has been training in performing arts and community theatre and has worked modestly with radio/audio media.
Community art and media have become an emerging focus and through this inquiry Deepak has been trying to juxtapose the social, cultural and psychological development to better understand emerging political negotiations and identities.

Vinay '''''Sreenivasa''''' (vinay.sreenivasa(at)yahoo.com) is a member of Hasiru Usiru and has been part of the campaigns on road widening and metro projects.
He is also a member of the Bengaluru Janara Vedike, a city wide platform which brought out a People’s Manifesto for the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (city corporation) elections.
He also works on issues related to the digital commons.

Tom '''''Thomas''''' (tomt(at)praxisindia.org) has been a development worker for the past 25 years in various capacities—as a student activist, development manager, participatory practitioner/researcher/trainer.
Currently based in Chennai, heading Praxis–Institute for Participatory Practices.

Dr Sukhadeo '''''Thorat''''' (thoratsukhadeo(at)yahoo.co.in) is Chairman, University Grants Commission and Professor of Economics, Jawaharlal Nehru University.
He has a BA (Milind College of Arts, Aurangabad, Maharashtra), MA Economics (Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University, Aurangabad), MPhil/PhD Economics (Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi) and Diploma in Economic Planning (Main School of Planning, Warsaw, Poland).
His research areas include agricultural development, rural poverty, institution and economic growth, problems of marginalised groups, economics of caste system, caste discrimination and poverty.
He was Director of the Indian Institute of Dalit Studies, New Delhi 2003–06 and Research Associate of International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington DC, USA, since 1992.

'''''Yashoda''''' (sanchayanele(at)yahoo.com) Director, Sancheya Nele an organisation working for securing human rights for Dalits in Bengaluru and the convener of Karnataka Dalit Mahilla Vedike, a network of young Dalit women leaders in Karnataka.

</div>