(from [[Vocabulary of Commons]])
==Preface==

There is now incontrovertible evidence from many studies that most people depend on the commons most of the time—and the smaller the per capita resource base, the greater this reliance.
It is also seen that communities who live in marginal lands and whose livelihoods are highly dependent on natural resources are among the most vulnerable to climate change.
Many indigenous and traditional communities, pushed to the least fertile and fragile lands as
a consequence of historical, social, political and economic exclusion, are among those who are at a greater risk.
Concern Worldwide works with such marginalised communities in different parts of the globe.
For these communities, the commons are their lifeline—the bedrock of their survival and their only dependable security net.

For commons to be recognised and acknowledged as a legitimate space is the first step in legitimising the existence, survival and dignity of such communities.
Only after acknowledgement can we move towards a better understanding systems as they exist, and strengthen the effort to restore, revive and rejuvenate the commons.

With the increasing rush towards privatisation and industrial development, their voices are being drowned out as a prelude to being pushed out and then erased.
The lesson of globalisation is that there is no ‘one solution’ much less ‘one size fits all’.
It is for this reason that Concern Worldwide believes that all voices must be heard and that the symphony of the commons should not be replaced by groupthink.
In partnering with the Foundation for Ecological Security in bring out this volume, we hope that these voices from the commons will be one of many steps to consolidate the uncommon wisdom of the commons.
It can then be tested and socialised.
It is our hope that this work is a stepping stone in that direction.

Dipankar Datta<br />
Country Director<br />
Concern Worldwide India