=More information=

'''* Article: A critical review of voluntary simplicity: Definitional inconsistencies, movement identity and direction for future research. By Lucas Aidar and Peter Daniels. The Social Science Journal, 2020.''' [https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/citedby/10.1080/03623319.2020.1791785?]

"Voluntary simplicity (VS) is the contemporary version of an ancient notion where inner growth is prioritized over riches and material accumulation. The VS lifestyle is often discussed as a more sustainable lifestyle, which has been a primary factor for attracting interest from a range of research disciplines. However, definitional inconsistencies plague VS. This has resulted in incompatible research methodologies in identifying the different categories of participants that can be associated with this lifestyle. This article addresses the main definitional issues of VS and provides a set of ‘VS criteria’ that can be useful for future empirical work and for discussing the different levels of simplicity. VS has also been criticized for lacking political teeth and the inability to influence structure change. The extent that VS can be considered a social movement is also discussed and suggestions for further research on this topic are provided."

(https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/citedby/10.1080/03623319.2020.1791785?scroll=top&needAccess=true)


==Bibliography==

Alexander S. (ed.) (2009) Voluntary simplicity: The poetic alternative to consumer culture. Whanganui, NZ: Stead & Daughters, Ltd.

Alexander S. (2011) ‘The voluntary simplicity movement: Reimagining the good life beyond consumer culture’, The International Journal of Environmental, Cultural, Economic & Social Sustainability, 7: 4-20.

Alexander S. (2015) Prosperous descent: Crisis as opportunity in an age of limits. Melbourne: Simplicity Institute.

Alexander S. and S. Ussher (2012) ‘The voluntary simplicity movement: A multi-national survey analysis in theoretical context’, Journal of Consumer Culture, 12(1): 66-86.

Burch M.A. (2013) The hidden door: Mindful sufficiency as an alternative to extinction. Melbourne: Simplicity Institute.

Daoud A. (2011) ‘The modus vivendi of material simplicity: Counteracting scarcity via the deflation of wants’, Review of Social Economy, 69(3): 275-305.

Elgin D. (1993) Voluntary simplicity: Toward a way of life that is outwardly simple, inwardly rich, 2nd edition. New York: Harper.

Etzioni A. (1998) ‘Voluntary simplicity: Characterization, select psychological implications, and societal consequences’,Journal of Economic Psychology, 19: 619-643.

Zamwel E., O. Sasson-Levy and G. Ben-Porat (2014) ‘Voluntary simplifiers as political consumers: Individuals practicing politics through reduced consumption’, Journal of Consumer Culture, 14(2): 199-217.

[[Category:Degrowth]]
[[Category:Post-Growth]]
[[Category:Movements]]