=Description=

Will Ruddick:

"The concept of Wafq is deeply rooted in Islamic traditions. Derived from the Arabic root for "concordance" or "harmony," Wafq represents a collective approach where individuals come together to support each other, particularly in times of need. This system, which may not be universally practiced but reflects a broader Islamic ethos of community support, exemplifies how reciprocity and shared responsibility are woven into the fabric of Islamic social life.

In Wafq, the community acts as a safety net. Imagine a small village where each member contributes their skills, resources, and time to support communal projects and aid those in distress. This might include helping to rebuild a neighbor's home after a storm, pooling funds for medical expenses, or collectively supporting a member's education. These acts are often framed within the broader concept of Zakat (charity), where giving is not just an act of kindness but a duty and a path to spiritual growth.

The beauty of Wafq lies in its balance. It’s not just about giving but also about creating a system where each contribution is valued and reciprocated, ensuring that the community thrives as a whole. This balance prevents the accumulation of debt and ensures that no individual feels overburdened, maintaining a harmonious and equitable community."

(https://willruddick.substack.com/p/islamic-wafq-and-jewish-kibbutz)


=More information=

* [[Kibbutz]]

* "Islamic Qarad Hasan: Similar to Wafq, the concept of Qarad Hasan (benevolent loan) allows individuals to give interest-free loans to those in need, reinforcing the principles of mutual support without creating financial burdens." [https://willruddick.substack.com/p/islamic-wafq-and-jewish-kibbutz]

[[Category:Cooperation]]
[[Category:P2P_Solidarity]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]