
'''= voting system weighted for contribution'''


=Description=

"1.A voter may hold multiple votes. Votes  are earned through community service. In other words, the more involved a person is in his community, the more say he has in its governance. 
 
2.A voter may cast multiple votes for each ballot question. In other words, when one person casts three votes for a question, this over-rides two people who each cast a single vote against. 
 
3.Votes that are cast against the prevailing majority are lost. In other words, if a voter casts 23 votes against a ballot question, and the ballot question prevails, he loses 23 votes. Voters who cast votes with the majority do not lose votes. 
 
4.A voter must cast all his votes in each Börse and may only decide the allocation. This ensures active participation. 
 
5.There is a demurrage charge each voting cycle. This ensures that all voters are motivated to bid on tasks. It also allows someone to vote against the majority, up to the demurrage charge, with no additional loss. 
 
6.A voter with no votes is not guaranteed a place in the community. This is either a person who does no work or is contrary to the main direction of the community. 
 
7.No one person may have as many votes as the rest of the community combined. In other words, it must be possible for the rest of the community to out-vote a single person. 
 
8.Voting is anonymous. This prevents the possibility of "corrective pressure" being applied against voters who have disobeyed the wishes of a voting block. "
(http://schwarz10.de/about/wahlboerse.html)


=Discussion=
 
 
"The system described so far has a number of powerful ramifications.
 
People who consistently vote against the majority lose power, thereby allowing a coherent decision making process. For example, if the majority votes to host a nutrition class, they will also be able to vote to buy chairs for it, because the people who voted against the nutrition class have lost voting power.
 
Members who have contributed to the community, and whose ideas are in accordance with the community, will have the most influence.
 
The most important aspect is that people are encouraged to cheat the system, That is to say, voters are motivated to discover what other voters think, in order to better predict the outcome of the vote. This effectively brings every voter into the back-room. This encourages consensus to be built before the decision is made. The vote becomes a technical formality."
(http://schwarz10.de/about/wahlboerse.html)


[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Governance]]