

=Description=

Sharon Ede:

"Conceived by Australian creative planner and urbanist David Engwicht in 1992, the
Walking School Bus is an agreed, set route to and from school supervised by adult
volunteer “drivers” (often parents) who collect students from various stops. The bus is free,
and every child is welcome, whether or not they have a parent who can be a driver.
The Walking School Bus can be as simple and low cost, or as elaborate, as the students
and drivers wish to make it. A ratio of one adult to eight students is recommended.
Benefits to students include learning to negotiate the road and their neighborhood,
improving social interaction, and getting physical exercise. Benefits to parents include
reducing fuel costs, saving time, and gaining peace of mind in knowing that their children
are going to school safely. The Walking School Bus often has the support of a local
authority and/or the school, but can be self-organized and run by parents and students.
The Bicycle Train is a version of the Walking School Bus where the mode of transport is
cycling."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)


=Status=

Sharon Ede:

"Results:

• The Walking School Bus has become a global phenomenon, widely adopted in the
U.K. and other parts of Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and the U.S.
• In 2010, Western Australia had established 39 active Walking School Bus routes at
26 primary schools. Routes are approximately 1 km, and surveys revealed that
there were more than 10,000 “trips” made in the first three terms of the year. During
the same period, these efforts saved nearly 3.5 tons of greenhouse gas emissions.
• Auckland has over 350 active walking school buses, with more than 4,000 children
walking to school.
• A 2011 study published in the Pediatrics journal revealed that children who were
randomly chosen to participate in a Walking School Bus over a five-week period in
Houston, Texas, increased their weekly rate of active commuting by an average of
38 percent."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)

=More information=

Resources:

“The Walking School Bus: A Guide for Parents and Teachers”:
www.travelsmart.gov.au/schools/pubs/guide.pdf

The case study excerpt is from:

* Sharing Cities: Activating the Urban Commons. Shareable, 2017

URL = http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf



[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Transportation]]

[[Category:Sharing Cities Book]]