'''= "The Summer of Wamo has since become a shared memory and a unique cultural phenomenon among Chinese-speaking Web3 enthusiasts. This decentralized, permissionless collaboration born from collective effort redefined the Chinese-speaking Web3 culture. ... Now, we're set to launch Wamotopia in Chiang Mai, a gateway to a new world."'''

URL = [https://matters.town/@wamotopia/464093-hello-wamotopia-2023-bafybeiehaseegr5ix5rkbsaf3o7uf2nkgqxh444js77qkfsekvevtsaww4?referral=wamotopia]


=Description=

WAMOTOPIA 2023: From December 16, 2023, to January 1, 2024, Wamians will jointly undertake a profound exploration of the future world, weaving a spectacular emergence, a prototype society of the future in Chiang Mai.

In August 2022, a group of Web3 enthusiasts and community members, driven by principles of positive externalities, openness, mutual benefit, and open-source, initiated the "Summer of Wamo | Dali Web3 Summer Fest" in Dali. This event, fueled by a passion for technology, a quest for governance and self-organization in DAOs, reflections on public goods, and visions for community living and the future, planted a seed in Dali. Now, we're set to launch Wamotopia in Chiang Mai, a gateway to a new world.

The Summer of Wamo has since become a shared memory and a unique cultural phenomenon among Chinese-speaking Web3 enthusiasts. This decentralized, permissionless collaboration born from collective effort redefined the Chinese-speaking Web3 culture, fostering public goods and DAO organizations characterized by positive. As this seed was sown in Dali, some participants chose to stay and continue this decentralized emergence. Today, Dali has transformed into the hub for Chinese-speaking Web3, DAO organizations, digital nomads, and community living. Its spirit, carried by participants, now thrives across the globe, transcending geographical and national boundaries.

...

Wamotopia is a testing ground for Prototype Society. Each gathering of Wamians could be the start of incubating a prototype society. Our era demands coordinated efforts to confront systemic societal issues, creating new mechanisms and solutions. Due to the complexity of societal systems, it's challenging to derive a universal consensus from a theoretical model. Blind faith in a vision can also lead to disastrous outcomes. Like modern science and engineering achievements, social systemic changes require experimentation, iteration, and optimization after initial prototype feasibility, gradually gaining broader acceptance.

Wamotopia aims to create a space detached from traditional societal structures, where we can temporarily step away from the old world's Matrix, collectively imagining and shaping mechanisms, narratives, arts, technologies, and cultures of a future society. All Wamians will partake in molding the prototype society of the future. Participants can freely initiate or join any theme camp, with each camp embodying different thoughts and imaginations, intersecting and piecing together. In this process, mechanisms, cultures, technologies, and consensuses will gradually take shape through testing and verification, leaving seeds of the future – seeds that will sprout, grow, and become part of our future.

...

Wamotopia is a cultural emergence born from a shared creation of theme camps. Continuing the decentralized, permissionless organization style of the Summer of Wamo, theme camps and activities are spontaneously initiated by participants based on consensus. The Wamotopia preparation team will also provide infrastructure and public goods in the form of theme camps. Each camp will present a unique public space and vibe.

Wamians believe this free and open mode will spark the richest creativity, creating the best atmosphere and the most vibrant community. Theme camps serve as windows to the Wamotopia world, spaces for free expression, vision showcase, and connection building. These can be platforms to discuss future issues, display public goods creations, community playgrounds, hackathons, DAO community bases, Regeneration churches, concerts, art installations, workshops, or even ice cream trucks giving out free treats. These expressions and creations are not just future aspirations but the minimum viable practices transforming aspirations into reality."

(https://matters.town/@wamotopia/464093-hello-wamotopia-2023-bafybeiehaseegr5ix5rkbsaf3o7uf2nkgqxh444js77qkfsekvevtsaww4?referral=wamotopia)


=Discussion=

==Why Chiang Mai==

"Chiang Mai, standing tall in the highlands of Southeast Asia, is the world's Dali. It embodies people's longing for a free, relaxed life filled with poetic possibilities. Chiang Mai, like Dali, has a natural ecology, rich history, and culture. Its Old City and surrounding areas, spanning 1.5 square kilometers, are dotted with cafes, bars, and public spaces. Chiang Mai's low living costs and visa-free policies for many countries with a wide range of accommodations attract young people worldwide to live and form communities. Its temples, tropical jungles, and Buddhist culture imbue a pleasant, chill vibe. Open, relaxed, natural, and wild – these are the colors of Chiang Mai. In Chiang Mai, one can effortlessly nurture the wildest life and boldest imagination.

Wamotopia – a co-creation of a prototype society, a forthcoming urban festival akin to Burning Man, a vibrant, diverse, experimental public realm, a dream forged by a collective. Where else but Chiang Mai could be more fitting for this event?"


=More information=

* If you want to stay informed and participate in offline activities in Wamotopia, visit our public homepage @website/notion.site or '''website https://www.wamotopia.love/''' for timely information.

[[Category:Conferences]]
[[Category:China]]
[[Category:Thailand]]