'''= "The Pulse Pattern signifies  the repeated rhythmic surges of activity related to resource flows and exchanges".''' [https://integralpermaculture.wordpress.com/2012/07/04/the-wavepulse-of-human-history/]


=Description=

Integral Permaculture:

"Pulse is one of the 56 common patterns that Winton has identified (in his methodology of [[Pattern Dynamics]]).

'''The Pulse Pattern signifies  the repeated rhythmic surges of activity related to resource flows and exchanges.''' Pulse is one aspect of the more foundational First Order Pattern, Rhythm. Pulse demonstrates the increase, peak and decline in the rate of resource recovery and exchanges within systems. The capacity to maximize the rate of growth of flow exchanges needs to be balanced with minimizing the adaption required after the peak when decline sets in. The role of Pulse is to maximize exchange flows sustainably."
(https://integralpermaculture.wordpress.com/2012/07/04/the-wavepulse-of-human-history/)


=Discussion=

Integral Permaculture:

"All of this brings us up to the present interest in the pattern of the pulse, and how it has flowed through human history in the form of energy production and consumption, and how it relates to a number of my interests.

Tim Winton has spent a lot of time developing a new integral sustainability pattern language he calls PatternDynamics™, which will come up again later in this piece as one of my interests. Hundreds of patterns have been observed in nature, and it’s probably not a good idea to look at any one of them in total isolation, so let’s take a quick look at several patterns that Winton has identified that are relevant to this post.

We’ve already mentioned our main theme, the pattern of the pulse, which “signifies  the repeated rhythmic surges of activity related to resource flows and exchanges.” Systems ecologist Howard Odum was of the opinion that all systems on all scales pulse.  Storages gradually accumulate, consumers consume and develop, and eventually decline, and then dispersing materials that will be used in the next pulse.  Winton wisely comments, “The capacity to maximize the rate of growth of flow exchanges needs to be balanced with minimizing the adaption required after the peak when decline sets in. The role of Pulse is to maximize exchange flows sustainably.”  The pattern of the pulse demonstrates the principle of peaks, which is where the quote from Winton nearer to the top of this article comes in.

Other patterns that are important to our discussion are patterns of Energy (provides the ability to do work in dynamic change and transformation processes), Cycle (“rhythmic, repeated sequence of actions”), Flows/Stores (energy resources can be stored for future use, or they flow out in dynamic exchange processes), and Transformity (“the process whereby matter/energy resources are transformed through systemic processes into lesser amounts of matter/energy but higher qualitative complexity within the system”)."
(https://integralpermaculture.wordpress.com/2012/07/04/the-wavepulse-of-human-history/)

[[Category:Change Theory]]
[[Category:P2P History]]
[[Category:Network Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:P2P Futures]]
[[Category:P2P Cycles]]
[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]