
'''= forecasting / visioning project and methodology related to climate change, proposed by Richard David Hames'''


=Description=

Richard David Hames:

"Today, our society is in urgent need of master navigators and wayfinding. Having lost sight of where we have come from, our future has
become unclear and the way confused. Indeed without revised plans and a drastic course correction we risk losing our way completely.

Provisions on our vessel, once plentiful, are now insufficient - demanding that we get to a safe haven fast.
Industrial modes of subsistence have become incapable of providing for a human family of seven billion people. Systems we once took for
granted - including those which provide us with energy, food, water, a healthy environment and a vibrant economy - are all highly stressed or
failing. They were not designed for present conditions, nor are they viable in their current form. Many of the institutions upon which we rely for
sustenance and security are also struggling. Born out of an impulse to compete they are ill-prepared for the cooperation we need to overcome
the most perilous dilemmas of our time.

Alternatives are essential. Some can already be detected - just over the horizon. We are beginning to think as one world. An alternative story of
the human family is emerging from the fog of uncertainty. A story of renewed purpose. A story that embraces cultural diversity, human ingenuity
and planetary stewardship. A story attracting more sensitive provisioning and more enduring solutions to the most life-critical issues facing us.

A story demanding our attention for it is the future story of humanity. But where are the modern master navigators with the skills to recalibrate
our current course and lead us unerringly to that future? Where can we go to find that rare capability of pragmatism tempered by wisdom,
intelligence inspired by creativity?


Imagine an advanced, technologically-sophisticated agora – a decision theatre where powerful imaging and information technologies are tuned
into detecting (even anticipating) relevant shifts in world-system dynamics. Imagine these technologies have the capability to convert the
consequences into a variety of real-time visualizations - maps that allow those so ordained to comprehend, monitor and respond to complex
emergent data far more effectively than exists elsewhere.

Now imagine an interconnected web of such agoras located in strategic hubs around the world – in Tehran, Brasilia, Beijing, Geneva,
Singapore, Johannesburg, New Delhi, Canberra and San Francisco perhaps. Imagine, too, community leaders, entrepreneurs, indigenous
elders, artists and influencers from all walks of life, and from a mélange of cultures, convening in these decision theatres for one purpose –
redesigning a world-system - process by process, issue by issue - that is sustainable in every conceivable way and justifiable from every point
of view.

Imagine highly-trained curators, architects of evolution, guiding participants through a unique process of integral inquiry - enabling a
synthesized wisdom from past and present traditions of knowledge, intelligence, spirituality, emotions and practices, and capable of
transcending present-day problems, to evolve.
Imagine cadres of master navigators – Wayfinders - graduating from this experience and openly sharing their wisdom in ways that enable more
viable systems to be rapidly designed, prototyped and deployed - wherever they are most needed.
Finally, imagine the capability of deploying new knowledge created by the Wayfinders instantly, in every corner of the world, to generate
resilient change, help established agencies implement alternative policy options, and connect at the grassroots with social entrepreneurial
movements and activities.

This is Wayfinder. A politically neutral, internationally-collaborative approach to assure abundance in our world. Our intention is to create
communities of mind sufficient to supplement, refocus and further the reform ethos of discrete international bodies and sovereign states.
Wayfinder is both a planetary nervous system, an autonomic governance mechanism, and a globally-distributed design laboratory whose
practice field is the renewal of society’s most life-critical systems.
Into this environment we are inviting masters and artists from multiple disciplines and demographics, to experience and design viable futures
for humanity and in ways that allow us to consciously evolve the human species. These are the Wayfinders. Their praxis is wayfinding - a
deeply engaging process in which their collective energy is devoted to improving the human condition by awakening (in themselves and others)
new ways of thinking, doing and being.

Based on the principles of viable living systems Wayfinder connects all sectors of human society, across all physical, religious, political,
economic and psychological borders, to consciously advance an empathic society with an equitable economy and morally sustainable
practices."


[[Category:Intelligence]]