
'''= We Are Makers tells the story of the [[Maker Movement]].'''

URL = http://wearemakers.org/


=Description=

'''1.'''

"It’s the story not of tools but of people. A publisher. An entrepreneur. A design professor. A middle school teacher. Two museum educators. And a creative director.

Each provides an important viewpoint on why new technologies and communities of making are bringing us back to something deeply human."


'''2.'''


"What if everyone is creative, and the tools to shape our world are within reach?

This is a central question of the Maker Movement, a title Dale Dougherty famously assigned the cultural shift sparked by new tools and communities that emphasize learning through the process of creation.

There’s no question new technologies like 3D printing, micro-computers and online social networks create a perfect storm for the movement. But beneath these platforms lies the human element—the one theme that emerged again and again in our conversations about the future of making.

We Are Makers visits the workshops, garages and studios that are bringing making into the realms of education, public policy, commerce and communities everywhere.

The film was produced by a four-person team from Abilene Christian University in West Texas. Campus conversations about the potential impact of the movement on education inspired a film we hope will spark broader discussion of the power of learning through making and the many contexts that have nurtured its growth."
(http://blogs.acu.edu/wearemakers/about-the-film/)

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]