= an alternative to PayPal, "WePay was the '''de facto official way to send money to the “Occupy” protesters while simultaneously bypassing the largest financial institutions'''." [http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/innovations/post/the-real-wall-street-occupation-is-online/2010/12/20]

URL = https://www.wepay.com/


=Discussion=

==WePay and OWS==

"The Occupy Wall Street  movement has not only inspired people to take to the streets, but to open their own wallets to support the cause — many using mobile payment site WePay.

On Oct. 10, WePay had recorded more than $81,000 sent to groups associated with Occupy Wall Street. Just 17 days later, that number grew by 301% to more than $325,000, according to WePay, whose trove of data reveals who these donors are and where all that money is going.

A strong percentage of that money (83%) is collected in general funds used for shelter, food and other essentials. Another 4% has been designated just for legal fees — either when protesters are arrested or to learn their rights about where and when they can demonstrate.

The single largest spike for donations took place on Oct. 11 in Massachusetts. Boston police arrested 141 demonstrators in a restricted section of Rose Kennedy Greenway. Massachusetts donations multiplied by more than 400% from just $3,816 to more than $19,000 on that day.

In the United States, the state with the highest average donation is Connecticut, with an average of $65.15 donated. The lowest average is North Dakota with $16.25. While these don’t indicate total donations, it appears that most donors choose to go local. Excluding New York — considered the epicenter of the movement — 85% of donations traveled less than 100 miles.'
(http://mashable.com/2011/10/28/occupy-wall-street-donations/)



[[Category:OccupyWallStreet]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]