
=Description=

Patricia Alberge:

"We-Mysticism is not a solo journey; it happens between two or more people. The movement of WeMysticism involves leaving the external world behind, not to retreat into a private inner world, but to place all of your attention on an interpenetrating reality that exists in the space between. The WeMystical space is a liminal space that can be entered into together.   It’s an inner-space of relatedness that exists between us, but it is still an inner space. Inter-subjective awakening is the awakening to ‘reality’ together. When an individual mystic awakens it is a private experience. A mystic can experience timeless unity and Divine Communion and yet the person sitting next to them may be in an entirely different space in consciousness. In WeMysticism, when we give ourselves to the space between and follow what emerges, we experience a simultaneous sense of being completely withdrawn from the ordinary world, yet completely together in a world of mystical unfolding. We are inside of ‘reality’ together and our shared recognition is one of the most unspeakably joyful experiences most people have ever known.

Turning towards that deeper reality dissolves our experience of separateness. There’s a particularity that I discover with you; we dissolve and change, and there’s a new way of being that shows up and is unique to us. When that work occurs in a group the new way of being is unique to that group. We are actually entering into new worlds and structures of consciousness that are being born out of the coming together. And as the mystic is transformed by his or her journey into mystical depth, there is a transformation of our relatedness that occurs in WeMysticism. We are transfigured. There are now new possibilities in relationship that were not there before. It isn’t relationship, as we have known it. We are aware of things now that were not available before. We can do things now, say things now and perceive things now – together – that simply did not exist before.

Interest in shared spiritual practice and the relational ‘we-space’ is not uncommon today and it is being explored in different ways. It is a core aspect of the work of the Evolutionary Collective and in this work we are approaching shared practice in a distinctly mystical way. Traditionally the path of mysticism is love of the divine, and in the Evolutionary Collective one of the things that we are exploring is a path of shared love of the divine and a profound commitment to the evolution of the love and consciousness.

Entering into this realm of being awakens a higher source of wisdom that guides us further. It creates a feedback loop with a WeMystical divine that represents a higher possibility for humanity. As we become more and more available to this possibility and engage together with increasing sincerity and commitment in a space of ever-greater depth, this feedback loop gets stronger. Together we generate new possibilities of love, creativity and intelligence through our surrender to those very same possibilities. We are responsible for creating this opening by surrendering to it with the heart of a mystic.

There is a poetic quality to the innovation, creativity, love and intimacy that occurs in this way of being. It is so far beyond our normal sense of self that we find no way to categorize the experience. To the uninitiated this possibility sounds so extraordinary that it might be difficult to relate to. We are speaking about realms of experience that are simply outside of our ordinary perception of reality. But that is the realm that mystics have always worked in. In order to gain access to this level of experience we must suspend a certain kind of knowing. We have become accustomed to being certain of what we know. We carry such a strong sense of knowing what is possible and what is not; knowing who we are, and who we’re not; knowing who the other is, and who they’re not. This assumed certainty has to be set aside.

We also learn to communicate inside this space of not-knowing. To do this we allow our language to formulate itself spontaneously in direct response to our experience in whatever forms and directions it dictates. We allow a certain poetic quality to overtake us. We allow our language to be non-literal. Adherence to the literalness of language keeps us planted in the way we’ve always understood things to be. When we let language unfold more poetically, and follow where it’s taking us, rather than using it, we create a space for the unknown to come through us. In this way we find ourselves moving beyond the ordinary into the extraordinary."
(http://evolutionarycollective.com/mysticism-church-space/)

[[Category:Spirituality]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]