A radio series on the commons, mentioned by David Bollier 


URL = http://onthecommons.org/node/799


=Description=

"The commons is getting some serious airplay on the syndicated radio show and podcast, “A World of Possibilities" produced by the Mainstream Media Project.  Host Mark Sommer engages the likes of Elinor Ostrom, Vandana Shiva, Bill Gates Sr., and others – including Jonathan Rowe and me -- in some compelling conversations about a wide variety of commons and the meaning of “wealth."  

The first show, “What is Wealth? Passing on the Gift" features Bill Gates Sr. (Responsible Wealth) and Chuck Collins (United for a Fair Economy) talking about the ways in which their fortunes were not really “self-made" but a collective accomplishment that required the help of many others, including government, schools and communities. It’s refreshing to hear the myth of the self-made man so forcefully debunked. Jonathan Rowe also talks about how much private wealth is generated from common resources such as air, water, soil, schools and government loans.

The second show in the series, “Richer Than We Know: Reclaiming Our Natural Inheritance" explores the varieties of resources that we own in common – air water, parks, oceans and much else. Guests include Vandana Shiva, the noted anti-globalization and biotech advocate, economist Robert Costanza, Connie Best of the Pacific Forest Trust and others.

The third show, “Who Owns This Place Anyway?" explores how commons are crucial to our sense of identity and belonging, and how markets and commons fit together. Among the guests interviewed here are the prominent commons scholar Elinor Ostrom, NYU copyright scholar Siva Vaidhyanathan, anti-noise crusader Aaron Friedman, comedian/philosopher Emily Levine, and David Bollier."
(http://onthecommons.org/node/799)

MainStream Media is at http://www.mainstream-media.net/about/about.html

[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Commons]]