
'''= Web 3G is an evolution of Web 2.0 enhancing it through the appropriate use of light semantics.'''

''another way to describe [[Web 3.0]] or [[Web 2.0]] enhanced with [[Semantic Web]] technology so it can form a [[Giant Global Graph]]''


=Description=

"Web 3G is what happens when you fuse the social participation of Web 2.0 with the decentralized structured information of the Semantic Web. The result is a smarter way of organising information in a network of interwoven semantic links and content, enhanced with feedback from usage and participation. We're coming up to the end of two decades of the Web, the first of which was spent seeding the bare essentials of the web of documents. The second decade saw widespread broadband adoption enable mass participation and creation of content by millions. The next decade is going to radically change how we find, create, use and relate to that information.

The Web right now is built from the generic hyperlink, which says nothing more than "look over here". But even this weak semantic was enough to enable Google's Pagerank to organise and score the Web. Imagine how much more powerful the hyperlink could be if it were possible to express sentiment or meaning in the link. Even if that were limited to positive or negative endorsement of the target of the link, the value to the relevance ranking of search engines and applications would be huge. However, the possibilities for expressing the intention of a link between two pages are endless. For example, it could be possible for writers to say whether they support or reject the views expressed in the target of the link, or whether they are linking to conflicting evidence or alternative versions of the same information. These simple expressions of intention could provide an entirely new dimension of metadata. The links between things are fundamental to the existence of the Web and the value of understanding why things are related is huge.

Web 3G is an evolution of Web 2.0 enhancing it through the appropriate use of light semantics. Links between things become more clearly typed, embedded data on pages becomes more easily understood by machines, all the while retaining the ability for people to connect and link and critique the quality and relevance of the data. It becomes the semantic graph, open to participation by everyone without having to ask anyone's permission. It is not Artificial Intelligence, there are no formal ontologies or logic reasoning, but some of the tools and techniques of AI are needed: neural networks, classifiers, heuristics, Bayesian networks and statistical analysis.

A whole new generation of applications are emerging that feature huge levels of interconnections and we hope to enable many of those to be built using the Talis Platform. Many of these connections will be internal to the application but by exposing raw data, in the ways suggested by the Linking Open Data project, every application can link to and reuse information managed by every other application. This is a step beyond data portability: rather than copying data from one application to another the norm will be to reuse data in situ. That way the data never gets out of date because it's shared and we can use the best application to manage each piece of our data, depending on our situation. This is what Tim Berners-Lee meant by the Giant Global Graph: a world-wide network of links with meaning."
(http://blogs.talis.com/nodalities/2008/03/web_3g.php)

[[Category:Technology]]