
'''= A web space is a personified composition of web resources.'''


=Description=

Yihong-Ding:

"First, a web space is a composition of web resources. A web space is not a space of pre-allocated memory, and nor is it an assigned virtual space somewhere on the Web. In contrast, a web space refers to a particular collection of web resources that are well organized under certain discipline.

Second, a web space is personified. By personified, the resources at a web space are subjectively assigned by the owner of the web space. Thus, these assignments are reflection of consciousness of the owner.

In a whole, a subjectively arranged composition of web resources represents a disciplined and self-complete subset of consciousness of the owner. By disciplined, there are reasonable logics existed in this composition. By self-complete, this composition fully expresses a fact, though the expression might be subjective. We can thus personify such a composition to be a virtual person. This is the ultimate understanding of a web space.

There are several derivations based on this understanding of web space.

(1) We can watch a person. Similarly, we can read a web space.

(2) We can tell a person more facts. Similarly, we can write to a web space.

(3) We can educate a person meanings of the facts he knows. Similarly, we can semantically annotate content in a web space and apply logic reasoner in this web space. By this way, we also educate a web space as if it is a virtual person." 
(http://yihongs-research.blogspot.com/2007/09/web-space.html)


[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Technology]]