

=Description=

By Robin Good at
[http://www.masternewmedia.org/online_collaboration/collaboration-tools/best-online-collaboration-tools-Lancelot-research-part-1-20070422.htm]

"Web presentation tools and technologies provide the means to deliver any PowerPoint-based or similar type of visual presentation to an Internet-connected audience, no matter where participants are connecting from.

Most web presentation technologies, do away with requiring end users to have an installed copy of Microsoft PowerPoint and increasingly offer not just the ability to digitally distribute such presentations but also of creating them.

Until recently, sharing a PowerPoint presentation with other people, let alone doing this in real-time, was a major challenge. The size of a typical PowerPoint file didn't make it easy to send it via email, and incompatibilities between different versions of PowerPoint made the effort even more complex for the non-technical user.

PowerPoint itself allows the saving of any presentation as a set of Web pages. But while such output can be comfortably looked at on the computer where you have created it, it is not easy at all for a non-technically-savvy person to learn how to make those web pages show up at a specific address on the web where anyone else connected to the Internet can see them too.

Newer software and web-based technologies now allow the easy-uploading of PowerPoint presentations to dedicated web presentation services and even the delivery of unattended, on-demand presentations having a custom web page address (URL). In other cases, software or web-based tools allow for the real-time delivery of your presentation to a number of attendees while integrating other complementary collaboration features.

Some of these tools integrate the optional ability to integrate live or recorded audio to accompany the presentation."


=More Information=

Robin Good's Miniguide is at
http://www.kolabora.com/news/2007/01/25/web_presentation_tools_and_technologies.htm


[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Education]]