

=Discussion=

Marcus Cake:

"Opaque channels were necessary, but now need to be replaced
Web 1.0 channel refers to the social, political or industrial structures used by our community to distribute information, participate, collaborate and make decisions amongst members of a social group, industry, company or political system. The channel has became the primary means for people to distribute, participate and contribute in different parts of our community. There was no alternative and distribution channels are all pervasive. Channels are also expensive and their private owners seek to maximise profits. This restricted the ability of people to use the channel and they type of products and information that flowed through it. The content of the channel is determined by profit margin and not what is best for the community. This includes information and the goods and services be we consume. Every channel is a potential source of profit.


'''Web 1.0 channels have sacrificed long term community objectives'''

Web 1.0 channels in many diverse areas of our community have failed to balance the communities short and long term interests. The unbridled profit motive and lack of transparency of channels in Web 1.0 has delivered our community a succession of global governance failures. This includes national bankruptcy, oil shortages, food shortages, war, pro-cyclical investment cycles, inadequate retirement savings, underinvestment in infrastructure to support our society and an unsustainable way of life. Humanity has a 50% chance of surviving beyond 2100.


'''Web 2.0 participation gave us an insight into what is possible'''

Web 2.0 demonstrated the technology to assemble and manage large global crowds with a common interest in social interaction. Large numbers of people joined the internet with broadband penetration reaching 90% in many major economies. Web 2.0 is characterised by information of little inherent value and revenue was derived from third parties wanting to show advertising to eyeballs. Organisations are exploring the potential of Web 2.0 enterprise innovation or industry model innovation with single point solutions such as wikis and forums. However, enterprise or industry innovation will be derived from the full application of Web 3.0 online networks concepts, rather than Web 2.0 point solutions.


'''Web 3.0 transforms industry and politics with peer to peer structures'''

The internet provides a costless distribution channel that can connect more than one billion people peer to peer. Major economies are now dominated by 70% services which are information based. Individuals can now create online networks in 90 days for US$25k. These online networks will reshape industry and political systems. Web 3.0 online networks allow people to see through the market or community and collectively match, learn, consume information in hours not months. The key elements of Web 3.0 online networks are outlined here.


'''Web 4.0 transforms the world with a critical mass of social, industry and political networks'''

Web 4.0 achieves a critical mass of participation in online networks that deliver global transparency, governance, distribution, participation, collaboration in industry, political and social networks and other key community endeavours. Web 4.0 delivers community sovereignty to channels and information. Global Web 1.0 channels were created over 100 years of mergers, acquisitions and organic growth. Global Web 3.0 online social, industry and political networks can be created within 12 months. The potential of achieving rapid economic development and industry innovation outcomes in a very short time frames is real."
(http://www.marcuscake.com/key-concepts/internet-evolution)


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Standards]]