
'''* Essay: The Web Based Face-to-Face Economy. An empirically based typology of new forms of social and economic interaction. An Essay by Fabian Bethge, 2012-02-10'''

Available from author via fabianbethge AT googlemail DOT com

Essay is based on Master Thesis “Markt trifft Gemeinschaft”, accepted at the Institute for Media and Communication Science at the University of Technology in Ilmenau on September 5th, 2011.


=Summary=

"We need social innovation and development mainly because we have to solve some problems that we created ourselves, namely the depletion of natural resources, increasing social isolation and problems related to the enormous acceleration of ever changing markets. How can we make use of the internet as a tool of such social development? One possible solution we will discuss in this essay: understanding the mechanisms how people can let others take part in the usage of their goods, in the exercise of their talents, in the planning of their leisure activities, etc; in other words: new forms of access to personal resources. While one major strength of the web is to abstract relationships1, a major strength of face-to-face communication is to concretize relationships. Combining these two layers are a very promising way to open and flexible and at the same time trustful communities and marketplaces. To describe this phenomenon we use the term of the “web based face-to-face economy”."



=Excerpt=

From the conclusion, by Fabien Bethge:

"The Web Based Face-to-Face Economy was defined as a process of opening up everyone’s own goods, talents, interests and requests to their peers. We argued that the above mentioned websites are a good tool for a necessary process of social innovation, and we tried to contribute to a better understanding of this tool. Based on the empirical analysis twelve types of transaction-based P2P communities were differentiated. These embody twelve different basic social and economic interactions. After all it is important to mention that each of the studied websites is unique, and the categorization might fit to some websites better than to others. Further it has to be stated that those websites which are not accessible to the public like many online portals of universities or for staff of specific organizations are underrepresented in our sample. Even though this could be a basis for better understanding the role of the internet for economic and social transitions."




[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Economics]]