

=Description=

Panayotis Economopoulos (and EVANGELOS MAVRIKIS):

"There are a large number of web-based “barter” exchange systems serving millions
of customers internationally. Modern barter is perceived as trade without the use of
national currency or other monetary medium of exchange. Multilateral bartering is
based on the exchange of IOUs (I Owe U) issued by the system, usually referred to
as barter-credits, barter-units, barter-dollars or credit-units. They are essentially a
form of e-tokens and e-coupons. In large B2B exchange markets where taxation
issues emerge they are units of a legal private currency accepted by the members of
the barter network. These barter systems are based on trust and are not able to
secure internally with collateral against fraud, default and quality
mismatches except via price quote variation and ex post system access denial."


=Directory=

Here is a list of such barter exchange sites:

o Ormita Commerce Network (http://www.ormita.com/)
o National TradeBanc (http://naionaltradebanc.com)
o Biz 2 Biz Commerce (http://www.biz2bizcommerce.com/)
o Community Cretits.com www.communitycredits.com,
o Barter Your Way http://www.barteryourway.com/

"A smaller number of barter exchanges promote traditional barter in the form of
goods and services swap. The most popular such site is the non-commercial UExchange
(http://www.u-exchange.com/). These barter swap systems cannot
handle multilateral trades, no credit is extended and no means of
collateral against fraud, default and quality mismatches is provided except
price quote variation and ex post system access denial."


=More Information=

* WORKING PAPER NO 10. ECONOMOPOULOS FUND. MULTILATERAL BARTER EXCHANGE SYSTEM WITH CREDIT LEVERAGE OPTION
BY PANAYOTIS ECONOMOPOULOS AND EVANGELOS.

"We propose an electronic exchange system desired to promote multilateral trade of
goods in a business to business (B2B) market. The goal is to partly overcome
substantial liquidity shortage and excessive inventory levels by utilizing on
information technology to match multilateral trading needs not served
by the monetary medium of payment. Furthermore, the system facilitates
electronic trade and reduces transaction costs, by lowering inventory
levels, point of sale space, promotional resources and interest costs."


[[Category:Money]]