=Discussion=

==Investment Thesis: [[Smart Villages as the Epicenter of Regenerative Transformation]]==

By @closerearth:

"Over the past century, environmental degradation has led to biodiversity loss, soil depletion, and disrupted water cycles. Centralized food production models and unsustainable land management have been major contributors. To sustain life on the planet, we need an urgent transformation—revitalizing localized food production, restoring soil, enhancing water retention, and preserving biodiversity.

A key opportunity lies in Web3-enabled regenerative villages. These villages have the potential to become socioeconomic hubs driving the regenerative transformation. By supporting local nodes of digitally connected villages, we can empower communities to participate in global ecological markets while also fostering a renewed sense of purpose and belonging.

This vision scales by building a grassroots movement of village builders who replicate proven models, equipped with technology to enhance their success. This approach provides the broad impact needed for tangible global change.

Financially, we anticipate a major shift over the next decade, with central banks, government programs, and financial markets incentivizing regenerative practices. Instruments such as carbon credits, biodiversity credits, and water credits will provide financial backing for land stewards embarking on regenerative journeys.

We’re eager to collaborate with like-minded individuals and organizations to bring this vision to life. If this resonates with you, we’d love to explore opportunities together.

This vision is already taking shape on the ground. You can visit @tdfinyourdreams in Portugal, the first hub we are powering—many more to come. 🚀

In essence, Web3 villages can serve as instruments for legitimizing natural assets and catalyzing regeneration—a foundation for a #NatureBackedEconomy where entities like @CeloOrg, @MakerDAO, and others aim to hold natural assets in their treasuries."

(https://x.com/closerearth/status/1695453917717434473)

[[Category:Crypto_Ecology]]
[[Category:Housing]]
[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:Villages]]
[[Category:Urban_Commons]]