

=Discussion=

"Both the browser and OS markets are becoming dominated by open source software. In the browser market, the two fastest-growing browsers—Safari and Chrome—are both built on top of WebKit, an open source project started by Apple. And now Amazon’s new browser, called Silk, is also built on WebKit. It’s unlikely Amazon would have entered the browser market if they’d had to build a browser from scratch.

Meanwhile, Amazon’s announcement of the Kindle Fire adds to Android’s already-considerable momentum. The Kindle Fire and stock Android tablets will reportedly be able to run each others’ apps, which means that the success of one will expand the market for the other.

It’s hard to make predictions, especially about the future, but I suspect that tablets and browsers will be dominated by Android and WebKit, respectively. Yet because Android and WebKit are open source projects, there’s little danger that their growing popularity will lead to the dominance of one firm, with the resulting stagnation. Even if the market is dominated by a single platform, that market share will be shared among several companies that build products using that platform, who wil compete with each other to produce enhancements to the underlying, shared code. And because firms won’t have to build new OSes or browsers from scratch, barriers to entry will be low."
(http://www.forbes.com/sites/timothylee/2011/09/28/the-kindle-fire-and-the-triumph-of-open-source/)


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]