

=Description=

Geoff Hollingworth:

"WebRTC stands for Web Real-Time Communications and  introduces  a real-time media framework in the browser core alongside associated JavaScript APIs for controlling the media frame and HTML5 tags for displaying.

You see, before WebRTC, you had to have either special access (if telecom) or use special plug-ins (if web). Now WebRTC allows anybody to introduce real-time communication to their web page as simply as introducing a table.

At Ericsson, we have a saying that anything that will benefit from having a connection will have one. We can extend that saying here: any context benefiting from communication will contain it. Communication becomes an existing feature in the environment rather than an additional services needing special attention.

Today, there are two standards bodies for defining WebRTC – W3C and IETF.

W3C takes care of the client side of APIs. IETF takes care of the media framework, codecs, session establishment, SDP vs. JSON, which Ericsson co-chairs."
(http://www.ericsson.com/thinkingahead/the-networked-society-blog/2012/02/02/webrtc-the-democratization-of-the-communications-industry/)


=Directory=

Compiled by Doug Belshaw and Vinay Gupta:

projects which use WebRTC and/or Persona and/or P2P technologies in innovative ways.

So far we’ve discovered the following and have talked to (or are arranging meetings with) the project leads:

# [[Drogulus]] [http://drogul.us/]- “a programmable peer-to-peer data store built for simplicity, security, openness & fun.”
# [[Grimwire]] [http://blog.grimwire.com/#blog.md] - “a RESTful Browser OS that does Peer-to-peer over WebRTC.” [http://bloggeek.me/grimwire-webrtc-interview/ Grimwire and WebRTC: An Interview With Paul Frazee]
# [[Open Peer]] [http://openpeer.org/] - “an open P2P signalling protocol.”
# [[PeerCDN]] [https://peercdn.com/] - “PeerCDN is a peer-to-peer distributed CDN that will make the web faster, more reliable, and help sites to reduce bandwidth costs.”
# [[PeerServer]] [http://www.peer-server.com/] - “a server in a browser with WebRTC.”
# [[Vole]] [http://vole.cc/] - “a web-based social network that you use in your browser, without a central server… built on the power of Bittorrent.”


== See Also ==
[[Redecentralize]] [http://redecentralize.org/] gathers interviews of decentralized project leaders:


1: [http://redecentralize.org/interviews/2013/07/15/01-ntoll-drogulus.html Nicholas Tollervey - Drogulus]

2: [http://redecentralize.org/interviews/2013/07/30/02-adam-zerotierone.html Adam Ierymenko - ZeroTier One]

3: [http://redecentralize.org/interviews/2013/08/07/03-tony-cryptosphere.html Tony Arcieri - Cryptosphere]

4: [http://redecentralize.org/interviews/2013/08/14/04-paul-serval.html Paul Gardner-Stephen - Serval Project]

5: [http://redecentralize.org/interviews/2013/09/12/05-jacob-arkos.html Jacob Cook - arkOS]

6: [http://redecentralize.org/interviews/2013/10/13/06-chris-mediagoblin.html Christopher Webber - Media Goblin]

7: [http://redecentralize.org/interviews/2013/10/17/07-jeremie-telehash.html Jeremie Miller - TeleHash]

8: [http://redecentralize.org/interviews/2013/11/03/08-bjarni-mailpile.html Bjarni Einarsson - Mailpile]

9: [http://redecentralize.org/interviews/2013/11/26/09-daniel-tent.html Daniel Siders - Tent]

10: [http://redecentralize.org/interviews/2014/01/02/10-daniel-gfshare.html Daniel Silverstone - gfshare]

=More Information=

Geoff Hollingworth:

"Both standards are expected to be finalized mid this year. So while we will see early releases of experimental browsers this year, Google Chrome being the first, we expect others.

However, as these implementations are experimental, they are not interoperable. We believe interoperable implementations will start to appear in 2012, with market ubiquity happening in 2014."
(http://www.ericsson.com/thinkingahead/the-networked-society-blog/2012/02/02/webrtc-the-democratization-of-the-communications-industry/)


[[Category:Standards]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]