

'''Article: Welcome to Google Earth. Anna Munster.'''

URL = http://staff.cofa.unsw.edu.au/~annamunster/people/Welcome%20to%20Google%20Earth.pdf

Questions about the sociality of Google Earth.


=Description=

Excerpts:

"I want to ask two key questions throughout this essay about Google Earth. First, what
kind of image or image set does it render for us in relation to contemporary information
culture? Its updating, mutating and compositing set of terrain and satellite images is often
referred to as a “virtual globe”. '''Should we therefore understand GE’s representational
status in terms of a simulated world?''' This may indeed be a fairly accessible way to begin
thinking about the GE experience as something that takes its place in a long line of virtual
environments from flight simulators through to fully interactive entertainment and
aesthetic experiences such as the CAVE immersive virtual reality environment. Indeed,
Google Earth could be thought, pursuing such analysis, as the ultimate of all simulations
– a multi-user cyberspace map of the world that is becoming the reference point for the
earth’s actual geography.

The second question follows from this and pertains to its status as an online environment.

'''Should Google Earth be considered more than a map, more than imaging or even
simulation of the world and instead as a shared, networked environment?''' In many other
multi-user online tools and environments such as games, sociable media, for example
MySpace and web publishing (blogs and wikis, for instance) the presence and activity of
others constitutes the experience to be had and spurs further development of these
environments. The term “sociable media” has been used to think through the
participatory and networked nature of such spaces.'''Is Google Earth a type of sociable
media rather than a set of images of the world?'''

What seems extraordinary about Google Earth is that it is a complete visual
environment at the same time as it is an almost total imaging of the world. If Google
Earth is to be thought of as sociable media then its virtual globe status may elevate it to
the ultimate in sociable-virtual mediation. Google Earth might be thought of as a
convergence of image and sociality where new transformations in visual practice, use and
understanding are caught up with or are co-emergent with transformations and
experiments around new socialities.

There are buildings, tanks, trees and monuments
represented in the data sets but never any sense of co-habitation of the environment with
others. This distinguishes Google Earth, again, from other online environments such
as blogs, social software networking and tools as well as gaming where the presence of,
and relation to, others (albeit sometimes homogenised and somewhat forced) assume
primary status. The GE environment is one in which there are many individual users in
full flight but no dimension of the social within its visual space.

The point I want to make here may seem obvious and yet its implication is quite profound
– the sociability of Google Earth as an exemplar of distributed, networked media lies
outside the actual visual environment and aesthetic experience of traversing the GE
globe. What I want to suggest, then, is that the relations between aesthetics and sociality
that are thrown up by Google Earth span an aporia that is axiomatic to contemporary
networked cultures. This aporia is produced and reproduced throughout networked media
and relationships: the offer of both an aesthesia of hyper-individuated and solitary, nodal
experience and the potential for new forms of collective practice, formation and
enunciation."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Geography]]