
= deservedly getting significant attention: Connectivism: Networked Learner

Video via http://au.youtube.com/watch?v=XwM4ieFOotA


=Description=

Wendy Drexler:

"As a grand finale for the Connectivism course, George asked participants to respond to the following questions:

1. What is the quality of my learning networks: diversity, depth, how connected am I?
   
2. How has this course influence my view of the process of learning (assuming, of course, that it has)?
   
3. What types of questions are still outstanding?
   
4. How can you incorporate connectivist principles in your design and delivery of learning?

Questions 2 and 4 are addressed in the video above. The presented scenario is definitely not a complete picture of connectivism. I think it's a good start for a k12 classroom. I view the work with my students as networked learning incubation.

I had great fun creating this video. My 15 year old son, Alex, helped with the artwork and voice over. My high school students are currently working on the project that is highlighted in the video. I owe a big thank you to Lee LeFever of CommonCraft. He kindly gave me permission to use the "Plain English" format for my project. I absolutely love the brilliant simplicity of his work.

I sincerely hope that other teachers will use the video to help colleagues, parents, and students understand the potential of networked learning."
(http://teachweb2.blogspot.com/2008/11/cck08-connectivism-networked-studentthe.html)


[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Education]]