

=Bio=

Wenonah Hauter is the Executive Director of Food & Water Watch. She
has worked extensively on water, food, energy and environmental
issues at the international, national, state and local level. She is
a leader in the campaign against the privatization of the water
commons and has been involved in many successful campaigns in the
U.S and Global South. Experienced in developing policy positions and
legislative strategies, she is also a skilled and accomplished
organizer, having lobbied and developed grassroots field strategy
and action plans. From 1997 to 2005 she served as Director of Public
Citizen Energy and Environment Program, which focused on water,
food, and energy policy. From 1996 to 1997, she was environmental
policy director for Citizen Action, where she worked with the
organization’s 30 state-based groups. From 1989 to 1995 she was at
the Union of Concerned Scientists where as a senior organizer, she
coordinated broad-based, grassroots sustainable energy campaigns in
several states. She has an M.S. in Applied Anthropology from the
University of Maryland. She lives on an organic farm in Virginia.

=Publications=

From [[Food and Water Watch]], United States [http://www.food&waterwatch.org]

Some of our publications that relate to protecting the global commons:

http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/water/report/dried-up-sold-out/
http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/water/report/money-down-the-drain/
http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/water/report/priceless/
http://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/water/bottled/industry-sales-bad-news-for-bottled-water/
http://documents.foodandwaterwatch.org/Casino.pdf
http://documents.foodandwaterwatch.org/CatchandTrade-IssueBrief.pdf


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Global Commons]]