
= a pattern language for successful humane economics?

URL = http://www.whatworksproject.com/


=Description=

"As far back as 1987, many people sensed something was fundamentally wrong with the economic system of America. While they complained about it or looked to the government to fix things, a few of us determined it wasn't about a fix at all. The problem is a fundamental design error (like a bicycle with square wheels) that no amount of repair can remedy. So rather than talk about what didn't work, we begin looking throughout human history to find “what works,” successful and sustainable solutions that people had forged when facing similar problems. The prototypes are there for those willing to take this approach.


Our subsequent goal is to bring these prototypical models together as a unified system so they function as both an ecology and economy for human habitat. The ultimate goal is restoration of our farms, factories, and production to our land so the economic rudder is held by ordinary people instead of monolithic corporate interests that pit people against each other and plunder the resources of earth.

In that vein, we are organizing to create capitalization systems, financial mechanisms, and alternative economies. These structures generate business to business resources, community managed banks, and investment partnerships through which new technologies, products, and jobs can arise to support new development around ecological design of both business and community. Think about what that could mean for everyone and for you.


Unlike, “think tanks” that just talk about such things, we are absolutely committed to this effort, whether in the Austin Texas and Kansas City, Kansas regions, or for other interested regions. But that comes with the condition that people set aside the TIME it takes to listen, learn, and participate. We understand the impact of this request.


Unlike the currencies of the world, where people may have more or less of it, there is one common currency we each possess, and that is the currency of time. You cannot make more time. It is the great equalizer; each person has only 24 hours in a day, regardless of wealth, status, or education. How we chose to “spend” our time reflects our values and what we truly think is important. For us, the need for us to spend our currency – our time – on this endeavor is even more compelling given the current economic crisis. We hope you concur and are willing to make the same commitment and join us."
(http://www.whatworksproject.com/tollan%20letters%20framed.html)


[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Research]]