
'''* Report: Affordable Space. How Rising Commercial Rents Are Threatening Independent Businesses, and What Cities Are Doing About It. By Olivia LaVecchia and Stacy Mitchell. Institute for Local Self-Reliance, April 2016'''

URL = https://ilsr.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/ILSR-AffordableSpace-FullReport.pdf?

=Description=

"This report examines what’s causing commercial
rents to skyrocket and explores six broad policy
strategies that elected officials and community
leaders are proposing to address it.

We find that the sharp rise in rents isn’t limited
to affluent neighborhoods. It’s happening across
a range of communities, with some of the most
intense pressure falling on businesses in lower
income neighborhoods. The problem is especially
detrimental to people looking to start new businesses,
further raising barriers to entrepreneurship and
stunting economic dynamism.

Just as there’s a public stake in the availability of
affordable housing, so too is there a public interest in
the commercial side of the built environment. Having
a healthy independent business sector is closely
tied to other municipal policy priorities, including
reducing climate emissions, expanding jobs,
lessening economic inequality, and strengthening
the social fabric of neighborhoods."


=Summary of Policy Recommendations=

* STRATEGY 1: Broaden Ownership. 
* STRATEGY 2: Reduce the Power Imbalance in Landlord-Tenant Negotiations
* STRATEGY 3: Zone for a Local Business Environment 
* STRATEGY 4: Set Aside Space for Local Business in New Development
* STRATEGY 5: Create a Preference for Local Businesses in Publicly Owned Buildings
* STRATEGY 6: Recognize Businesses as Cultural Landmarks.

"This report outlines a range of ideas that elected
officials, business owners, and community leaders
have come up with for keeping space affordable and
ensuring that entrepreneurs continue to thrive:


'''1. Broaden Ownership'''

Although not suitable for every small business,
owning rather than leasing is one of the best ways to
ensure stable occupancy costs. Only a small minority
of independent retailers currently own their space.
Several cities are exploring programs to increase
that share by helping businesses buy their buildings,
or buy their spaces as commercial condominiums.
Another approach involves expanding community
ownership of commercial buildings. Through
various structures, such as real estate investment
cooperatives, neighbors can invest in commercial
buildings and guarantee local businesses long-term
stability and reasonable, cost-driven rent increases.


'''2. Reduce the Power Imbalance in Landlord-Tenant Negotiations'''

Another set of policy ideas would give small
businesses certain rights when it comes time to
renew their leases. These protections might include
an established timeline for negotiations, an option
for a long-term lease, and recourse to arbitration.
Cities are also looking at ways to provide property tax
credits to landlords who provide affordable leases to
locally owned businesses.


'''3. Zone for a Local Business Environment'''

Zoning can be a powerful tool for creating a built
environment that provides plenty of opportunity for
local entrepreneurs. Key strategies include protecting
the varied fabric of established commercial
districts, ensuring an ample supply of small spaces,
and adopting business diversity ordinances that
encourage a mix of different types of businesses.


'''4. Set Aside Space for Local Businesses in New Development'''

Several cities have required that a portion of the space
in select new development projects be set aside for
locally owned businesses. These requirements could
be codified and applied across all development
projects that meet certain size or location thresholds.


'''5. Create a Preference for Local Businesses in Publicly Owned Buildings'''

Cities often own and invest in real estate themselves.
Some are establishing a preference for leasing
spaces in city-owned or -financed buildings to locally
owned businesses. In underserved communities, this
could include offering space at below-market rates
to local, neighborhood-serving businesses.


'''6. Recognize Businesses as Cultural Landmarks'''

Following in the footsteps of Rome, Paris, and
London, San Francisco has established a program
to recognize and support longstanding, culturally
significant businesses. The program provides
incentives to landlords who agree to 10-year leases,
and it could also evolve to help businesses purchase
their spaces."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Housing]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Policy]]