
'''* Book: What do we do about inequality?: The WPC Book 1, edited by Chris Oestereich. The Wicked Problems Collaborative, Kindle Edition, 2016'''

URL = [http://www.amazon.com/What-about-inequality-Problems-Collaborative-ebook/dp/B01APBVUZC]

=Description=

"Wicked problems are the massive, intractable issues which tend to defy solutions, or even progress. They’re interconnected and systemic, so attempts to affect change often ripple through in unexpected ways. Things like war, epidemics, and climate change are just a few of the things which the Wicked Problems Collaborative will take on. 

Our first book "What do we do about inequality?" looks at rampant and growing disparities in various forms and looks to help the reader understand these problem from new perspectives, while also offering ideas towards creating outcomes that are more just than those that are currently endured."

=Contents=

WHAT DO WE DO ABOUT INEQUALITY? 

1. TO ADDRESS INEQUALITY, THINK GLOBAL | Dylan Matthews 

2. THE IDEOLOGICAL STRAITJACKET | Sean McElwee 

'''3. WHAT DOES EQUIPOTENTIALITY BRING TO THE TABLE IN TERMS OF EQUALITY? | Michel Bauwens''' 

4. INEQUALITY, UNCOUNTED | Alex Cobham 

5. THE INEFFICIENCY OF INEQUALITY | Daniel Altman 

6. IS CAPITALISM UNFAIR? | Chris MacDonald 

7. THE PROBLEM OF INEQUALITY | Kevin Carson 

8. TOWARDS RENOUNCING PERSONAL PRIVATIZATION | Nicholas Archer 

9. THE INEQUALITY OF WILDNESS AND THE NECESSITY OF WILDNESS FOR EQUALITY | Megan Hollingsworth 

10. THE STICKINESS OF INJUSTICE | Jennifer Reft 

11. NOBLE FICTIONS AND SACRED TEXTS | Paul Fidalgo 

12. THE VOICES THAT ARE NOT YOUR OWN: MAINTAINING CHOICE IN THE AGE OF THE ALGORITHM | John C. Havens 

13. THE EMPATHY DEFICIT: WHY THE INEQUALITY CRISIS IS ALSO A CRISIS OF EMPATHY | Robin Cangie 

14. BILLIONAIRES WITH DRONES: FROM OLIGARCHY TO NEOMEDIEVALISM | Frank A. Pasquale 

15. WHAT SHOULD THE WORLD LEARN FROM THE EXPERIENCE OF INEQUALITY IN LATIN AMERICA? | Patrick Iber 

16. OCCUPY SANDY AND THE FUTURE OF SOCIALISM | Sam Knight 

17. THE “PLACE OF BIRTH” LOTTERY | David Kaib & Chris Oestereich 

18. INEQUALITY AND THE BASIC INCOME GUARANTEE | Scott Santens 

19. THE AGE OF INEQUALITY: CAUSES, DISCONTENTS, AND A RADICAL WAY FORWARD | Jason Hickel & Alnoor Ladha 

20. TWENTIETH CENTURY SOLUTIONS WON'T WORK FOR TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY INEQUALITY | David O. Atkins 

21. THE STATE OF AFFAIRS: HEADING FROM BAD TO WORSE | Adnan Al-Daini 

22. THE TRAGEDY OF OUR MIDDLE CLASS | Peter Barnes 

23. POST-SCARCITY ECONOMICS: WHY ARE SOME PUNDITS AND ECONOMISTS STILL ENAMORED OF AUSTERITY? | Tom Streithorst 

24. INCOME INEQUALITY: WHAT’S WRONG WITH IT, AND WHAT’S NOT | F. Spagnoli 

25. TURMOIL & TRANSITION | Harold Jarche 

26. KNOWLEDGE, POWER, AND A POTENTIAL SHIFT IN SYSTEMIC INEQUALITY | Jon Husband 

27. THE QUESTION OF INEQUALITY: A VIEW FROM INDIA | Akhila Vijayaraghavan 

28. WHAT YOU KNOW IS BASED ON WHO YOU KNOW | Deborah Mills-Scofield 

29. INEQUALITY IS ABOUT THE POOR, NOT ABOUT THE RICH | Miles Kimball 

30. TO TACKLE EXTREME POVERTY, WE MUST TAKE ON EXTREME INEQUALITY | Nick Galasso & Gawain Kripke 

31. ADDRESSING WEALTH EQUALITY WITH INVESTING SOLUTIONS FROM NATURE, NURTURE, AND SCIENCE | Rosalinda Sanquiche 

32. THE LOGIC OF STUPID POOR PEOPLE: STATUS, POVERTY AND GATEKEEPING | Tressie McMillan Cottom 

33. POOR CHOICES | Melonie Fullick 

34. THE PARTICIPATION GAP | Devin Stewart 

35. GETTING THE FRAME RIGHT | KoAnn Skrzyniarz 

36. THE FIRST JOB CREATOR | Adam Kotsko 

37. LIFE IN THE TREETOPS: A CHOICE OF CHASTENING PRIVATION OR DEBASING PROSPERITY | Chris Oestereich 

NOW WHAT? 



[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]