
'''Article: What is collective intelligence and what will we do about it? Thomas W. Malone'''


Source: http://www.oss.net/dynamaster/file_archive/080220/e85a39f0bcddd8a1352d573626dcc63a/Complete-4.0%20Book%20Text%20648%20sides.pdf]

Edited transcript of remarks at the official launch of the MIT Center for Collective Intelligence. October 13, 2006


=Text=

Thomas Malone: 

"It now falls to me, at this point in the program, to give you an overview of what
collective intelligence is, in the first place, and what we’d like to do about it.
The working definition of collective intelligence that we’re using is that
collective intelligence is groups of individuals doing things collectively that
seem intelligent.

Now, if you think about it that way, collective intelligence has existed for a
very long time. Families, companies, and countries are all groups of individual
people doing things that at least sometimes seem intelligent. Beehives and ant
colonies are examples of groups of insects doing things like finding food
sources that seem intelligent. And we could even view a single human brain as
a collection of individual neurons or parts of the brain that collectively act
intelligently.

But in the last few years we’ve seen some very interesting examples of
new kinds of collective intelligence:

• Google, for instance, takes the collective knowledge created by millions of
people making websites for other purposes and harnesses that collective
knowledge—using some very clever algorithms and sophisticated
technology—to produce amazingly intelligent answers to the questions we
type in.

• Wikipedia, at another extreme, uses much less sophisticated technology,
but some very clever organizational principles and motivational techniques,
to get thousands of people all over the world to volunteer their time to
create an amazing on-line collection of knowledge.

• In just a few minutes, you’ll hear from Alph Bingham, the CEO of a
company called InnoCentive, which lets companies with difficult research
problems harness the collective intelligence of thousands of scientists, in a
network all over the world, to help solve those problems.

• A lot of companies today—Hewlett Packard, Eli Lilly, Google and
others—are now beginning to use things called prediction markets where
people buy and sell predictions about future events (like sales of their
products) in ways that leads to more accurate predictions in many cases
than traditional market research or polling or other techniques.

Now, I think these examples are just the beginning. With new information
technologies—especially the Internet—it is now possible to harness the
intelligence of huge numbers of people, connected in very different ways and
on a much larger scale than has ever been possible before. In order to take
advantage of these possibilities, however, we need to understand what the
possibilities are in a much deeper way than we do so far.

So, it’s time to make collective intelligence a topic of serious academic
study. And that is our goal in the Center for Collective Intelligence.

The key question we’re using to organize our work is: How can people and
computers be connected so that collectively they act more intelligently than any
individual, group, or computer has ever done before?

In order to answer that question, I think at least three types of research are
needed. The first is just collecting examples or case studies. I think there are
going to be a lot of natural experiments going on in the next few years, people
trying lots of interesting things—with or without us. But I think that we can
help the world learn from its experience with all these natural experiments by
systematically describing and collecting examples of interesting cases of
collective intelligence.

For instance, Eric von Hippel, in the Sloan School, has done some very
interesting case studies of how the collective body of users of a product is often
a better source of innovation for a company’s products than the company’s own
researchers. This kind of case study research is common in business schools,
but it is certainly not the only kind of research we need to do.

Another kind of research we need to do is something that is more typical in
an engineering school. That is to create new examples of the phenomena we
want to study. If you’re an aeronautical engineer, for instance, you wouldn’t
just study birds and flying insects, you’d also want to create some flying
machines and study how they work. In our case, that means we want to create
some new examples of collective intelligence and study how they work.

For instance, Mark Klein in the Center for Collective Intelligence is leading
a group of people in a nascent project that hopes to harness the collective
intelligence of thousands of people around the world to help deal with the
problems of global climate change. We have some specific technical ideas
about how to combine computer simulation techniques with online ways of
representing issues and positions and arguments that we think may be helpful in
this process.

In the process of creating new examples, we hope to advance the state of
the art and to learn new design principles not just for the technologies, by the
way, but also for the human, the organizational, the social, and the motivational
systems that are needed for these systems to work effectively.

But case studies and creating new examples are not the only things we need
to do. I think we also need to do systematic studies and experiments. For
instance, in some cases, we’ll find examples of things that work well but we
won’t know why from just a case study. So we need to do systematic
experiments to help figure those things out. This is the kind of research that
would be more often done in a school of science or a school of social science.
For example, Sandy Pentland (in the Media Lab), Drazen Prelec (in the Sloan
School), and Josh Tennenbaum (in the Brain and Cognitive Sciences
department) are all doing different laboratory experiments about different ways
of helping groups make predictions more effectively.


But these three things—case studies, new examples, and systematic
experiments—are not the only things we need to do. We also need new theories
to help tie all these things together. I think that is especially important in the
case of collective intelligence because there’s now a lot of hype and prejudice
going around about collective intelligence.

On the one hand, there are people who think that collective intelligence is
magic, and if you just add it, it’ll make everything wonderful. For instance,
there is a book called The Wisdom of Crowds by James Surowiecki who—by
the way—does not believe what I just said. But many people who’ve heard
about his book do believe it. They think that just doing things “collectively”
will make everything great.

On the other hand, there are people who are prejudiced against the very
notion of collectiveness and decentralization. Very recently, for instance, there
have been a number of people who’ve looked at the success of Wikipedia and
pointed out ways in which is not perfect. And then, based on that, they have
argued that nothing without central control can ever be successful.

Now, I think both of these extremes are equally wrong. Sometimes
collective intelligence is good; sometimes it isn’t. Sometimes it works, and
sometimes it doesn’t. A very important part of our goal is to help put a more
solid scientific foundation under the claims in this area.

Fortunately, we don’t have to start from scratch in doing that. There’s
already a lot of good work that has been done in many fields, including
psychology, organization theory, artificial intelligence, brain science and
others. Part of what we want to do is to help organize the work that has already
been done. But even if we had already organized all of the results of all of the
previous research, there would still a lot to learn. New technologies are now
making it possible to organize groups in very new ways, in ways that have
never been possible before in the history of humanity. And no one yet
understands how to take advantage of these possibilities.

We certainly don’t have all the answers yet; we’re just beginning to ask the
questions. We hope we can make a contribution just by helping to frame the
questions better and also contribute to scientific understanding in many
different disciplines and help us understand new and better ways to organize
businesses, to conduct science, to run governments, and—perhaps most
importantly—to help solve the problems we face as society and as a planet."


=Bio=

"Thomas W. Malone (http://cci.mit.edu/malone/) is the Patrick J. McGovern Professor
of Management at the MIT Sloan School of Management. He is also the founder and
director of the MIT Center for Collective Intelligence and author of the book The
Future of Work. Professor Malone has published over 75 articles, research papers, and
book chapters; he is an inventor with 11 patents; and he is the co-editor of three books:
Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology, Inventing the Organizations of the
21st Century, and Organizing Business Knowledge: The MIT Process Handbook. For
further information about the Center, please visit: http://cci.mit.edu.


=More Information=

Tom Atlee: [[Co-intelligence, Collective Intelligence, and Conscious Evolution]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]