
'''* Article: What is Degrowth? From an Activist Slogan to a Social Movement. Bt FEDERICO DEMARIA, FRANÇOIS SCHNEIDER, et al. Environmental Values 22 (2013): 191–215, 2013 '''

URL = http://www.jnu.ac.in/sss/cssp/What%20is%20degrowth.pdf


=Abstract=

"Degrowth is the literal translation of ‘décroissance’, a French word meaning
reduction. Launched by activists in 2001 as a challenge to growth, it became a
missile word that sparks a contentious debate on the diagnosis and prognosis of
our society. ‘Degrowth’ became an interpretative frame for a new (and old) social
movement where numerous streams of critical ideas and political actions
converge. It is an attempt to re-politicise debates about desired socio-environmental
futures and an example of an activist-led science now consolidating
into a concept in academic literature. This article discusses the definition, origins,
evolution, practices and construction of degrowth. The main objective
is to explain degrowth’s multiple sources and strategies in order to improve
its basic definition and avoid reductionist criticisms and misconceptions. To
this end, the article presents degrowth’s main intellectual sources as well as its
diverse strategies (oppositional activism, building of alternatives and political
proposals) and actors (practitioners, activists and scientists). Finally, the article
argues that the movement’s diversity does not detract from the existence of a
common path."

[[Category:Degrowth]]

[[Category:Post-Growth]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Movements]]