
=Discussion=

Kojin Karatani:

"when we  view  feudal  societies  in terms  of  relations  of  production, we expect  to find class  struggle  between feudal  lords  and serfs—and yet  instances  of  this  are  hard to find. When struggle  did occur, it  was  mainly due  to misgovernment  by the  feudal  lord. In other words, when he  failed to meet  his  obligations  under bilateral  mode  of  exchange  B. Accordingly, even when struggle  emerged, it  could only take  place  within the  terms  defined by mode  B. In the middle  ages, cases  of  class  struggle  that  transcended  mode  B were  those  between  feudal  lord  and city people. In other words, resistance  to mode  of  exchange  B came  from  mode  of  exchange  C, which emerged in the  cities. In sum, the  ‘class  struggle’ that  took place  during the  medieval period was  not  an issue  of  modes  of  production;  it  was  a  conflict  between mode  of  exchange  B and mode  of  exchange  C, which was  spreading  from  the  cities. And in the  end, it  was  the  latter that  won out.   That  being the  case, this  may have  been a  ‘struggle  between classes,’ but  it  was  not  a ‘struggle  to abolish class  in itself.’ In fact, these  various  struggles  did harbor within themselves elements  that  could ‘sublate  class  in itself.’ That  is  what  rendered these  struggles  into epochmaking ‘class  struggles.’ But  those  elements  were  never realized and in the  end only aided in replacing one  ruling class  with another. For example, the  French Revolution with its  slogan of “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity”  ended in the  realization of  capitalist  society. That  being the  case, where  does  the  movement  to ‘sublate  class  in itself’ come  from? Generally, it  seems, this  arises  from  the  dimension of  religion and thought. In other words, not from  the  economic  base, but  from  the  ideational  superstructure. In my view, however, these actually come  from  the  economic  base—that  is, from  modes  of  exchange—but  in form  of  a  mode of  exchange  that  is  different  from  A, B, and C, and that  in fact  aims  to sublate  them. Moreover, 18 unlike  a  simple  concept  or idea, these  has  its  own ‘power’ of  compulsion. I will  discuss  this again below.   What  is  clear by now  is  that  the  class  struggles  we  can identify from  the  premodern period arise  not  from  mode  of  production, but  rather mode  of  exchange. And we  can say the same  thing with regard to class  struggle  in capitalist  society. For example, as  I noted above, Engels  observed the  class  struggle  in 1840s  England and from  this  hit  upon the  idea  of  ‘historical materialism,’ but  in 1848 when revolutionary movements  swept  across  Europe, the  quickest cessation of  class  struggle  was  seen in England. Moreover, this  happened not  because  of  the defeat  of  the  Chartist  Movement—but  rather because  of  its  partial  victory. After this, the  labor movement  in England was  legalized  and before  long there  appeared the  so-called labor aristocracy. What  emerged subsequently was  Fabian Socialism  (Social  Democrats). In sum, the class  struggle  that  occurred in England disappears  with the  victory, to a  certain degree, of  the working class.  Why? The  disappearance  of  class  struggle  at  this  time  did not  mean the  disappearance  of  the capitalist  mode  of  production. As  a  result  of  the  struggle, it  became  legal  for labor unions  and others  to engage  in negotiations  over wages. Seen from  the  perspective  of  modes  of  exchange, this  means  that  the  relations  of  capitalists  and laborers, which had resembled modes  B or A, started to move  towards  mode  C. Looking back from  this  perspective, the  fierce  class  struggle  of the  Chartist  Movement  arose  not  from  ‘relations  of  production’ or ‘contradictions  between productive  forces  and relations  of  production,’ but  rather from  the  emergence  of  a  new  mode  of exchange  that  was  in the  process  of  replacing the  previously dominant  mode. And when this  was achieved, the  labor movement  became  an accepted part  of  the  labor market—that  is, of  the capitalist  market  economy. And with this, while  it  appeared that  the  class  struggle  continued, in 19 fact  any ‘consciousness  to sublate  class  in itself’ had vanished.   In the  advanced capitalist  countries, class  struggle  and socialist  revolutionary movements were  destined to fade  away after an initial  period of  activity. Faced with this  situation at  the  end of  the  nineteenth century, following the  death of  Engels, Engel’s  desciple  Bernstein proclaimed the  end of  Marx-Engels  revolutionary theory. But  Lenin concluded that  because  the  proletariat would naturally come  to acquire  a  bourgeois-like  consciousness  and lose  its  class  consciousness that  would abolish class  in itself, and for that  reason believed that  class  consciousness  had to be introduced from  ‘outside.’ Lukacs’s  History  and Class  Consciousness  (1923) aimed to provide the  philosophical  basis  for this. In their case, the  ‘outside’ meant  the  ideas  provided by vanguard intellectuals  (or the  vanguard party). But  this  was  no different  from  Plato’s  philosopher-king, and in the  end its  result  was  to legitimize  dictatorship by the  party. By contrast, from  early on Ernst  Bloch pointed out  the  limitations  of  historical  materialist theory, and in  Thomas  Müntzer  as  Theologian of  Revolution  (1921) he  attempted to link the socialist  revolution with religion. Lukacs  criticized this  as  a  deviation from  correct  Marxism, but what  I want  to point  out  here  is  that  already in 1848, Engels  had confronted the  same  problem and adopted the  same  point  of  view. At  the  moment  when ‘class  struggle’ in England had died away, he  revisited the  question of  how  class  struggle  or even socialist  revolution might  be possible. This  could not  be  resolved from  an approach centered on ‘productive  forces  and relations  of  production.’ In other words, the  person who was  the  first  to propose  this  approach was  also the  one  who came  to this  realization about  its  limitations.   Specifically, he  began to research peasant  movements  from  sixteenth-century Germany (The  Peasant  War  in Germany, 1850). In this  work, he  tried to find ‘communism’ in the  thought of  the  millenarian movement  leader Thomas  Müntzer. 

Engels’s  previous  position was  that  the 20 ‘power’ that  drives  socialism  and movements  to sublate  class  in itself  comes  from  the  economic base  (contradictions  between productive  forces  and the  relations  of  production). But  here  he acknowledged that  these  come  instead from  the  ideational/religious  dimension. He  would then launch into a  study of  the  history of  primitive  Christianity that  would continue  until  the  end of his  life. It  is  also true, however, that  he  was  never able  to go beyond this  stage  and bring this question to its  logical  conclusion.14 Bloch was  in many ways  the  heir to this  approach.  He  would write  that, “Only a  athiest can be  a  good Christian;  only a  Christian can be  a  a  good atheist.”15  (Atheism  in Christianity). Even before  this, the  Christian theologian Karl  Barth would write  that, “A  well-known theologian and author has  recently argued that  these  two ought  not  to be  joined together as  they are  in our topic:  ‘Jesus  Christ  and  the  movement  for social  justice,’ for that  makes  it  sound as  if they are  really two different  entities  which must  first  be  connected more  or less  artificially. Both are  seen as  one  and the  same:  Jesus  is  the  movement  for social  justice, and the  movement  for social  justice  is  Jesus  in the  present.”16   We can say that  these  thinkers  were  confronting the  same  problem  that  Engels  had faced. Through a  paradoxical  logic, they were  trying to repair the  rupture  between religion and social movements—in other words, the  rupture  between  ideational  superstructure  and economic  base. But  this  problem  can be  resolved if  we  view  the  economic  base  in terms  of  modes  of  exchange rather than modes  of  production."

(http://www.kojinkaratani.com/en/pdf/An_Introduction_to_Modes_of_Exchange.pdf)

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]