

=Discussion=

David Week:

" Michel, your remark "It seems to be high time to separate "good" sharing and "evil" sharing. Which might be difficult." reminded me of McLuhan's tetrad, which is useful in analysing the effects of any new artefacts. A full description here: http://social-epistemology.com/.../gregory-sandstrom.../ but in sum, every new technology, practice or artefact has four dimension.

Taking AirBNB as an example…

A. “What recurrence or RETRIEVAL of earlier actions and services is brought into play simultaneously by the new form? What older, previously obsolesced ground is brought back and inheres in the new form?”

- the Inn, which is also the house of the Innkeeper
- lodgings, where the homeowner takes the lodgers into their house

B. “When pushed to the limits of its potential, the new form will tend to reverse what had been its original characteristics. What is the REVERSAL potential of the new form?”

- in the original form, AirBNB provided the homeowner with a new stream of income
- the potential reversal is this: as the homeowner gets used to this stream of income, he/she commits (bigger mortgage, new car, college for the kids) and the "extra money" turns into a full time occupation from which she/he cannot resign

C. “If some aspect of a situation is enlarged or enhanced, simultaneously the old condition or un-enhanced situation is displaced thereby. What is pushed aside or OBSOLESCED by the new ‘organ’?”

- the hotel, with its promise of privacy and anonymity, and professionalised service

D. “What does the artefact ENHANCE or intensify or make possible or accelerate? This can be asked concerning a wastebasket, a painting, a steamroller, or a zipper, as well as about a proposition in Euclid or a law of physics. It can be asked about any word or phrase in any language.” (1988)

- hard to say, but perhaps the sociability of travel, so that one comes back home having made new friends.

These are all my interpretations for AirBNB. But what I like about this is the suggestion that these changes are not in themselves good or evil, but rather that something will become easier, something else will become harder; something will be gained, something else will be lost."
(Facebook, August 2014)


[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Business]]