
'''David Korten. When Corporations Rule the World. Kumarian Press, 2001'''

URL = http://www.pcdf.org/books.htm


=Description 1=


"A modern classic, When Corporations Rule the World, issues a wake up call to people everywhere. Some call it the "bible" of the international protest movement against corporate globalization. It describes how the processes of economic globalization, deregulation, and privatization, have transferred the power to set social, economic, and political priorities from people, communities, and national governments to global financial institutions and corporations that place the needs of money ahead of the needs of people and the environment. The result is a global crisis in which the few become wealthy beyond imagination while the many live in dehumanizing poverty and desperation, critical life support systems fail, and the social fabric disintegrates.  Originally released in 1995, the classic edition has sold more than 90,000 copies in thirteen languages.

The Second Edition of When Corporations Rule the World,  released in April 2001, updates and expands the original edition. It is more accessible to the general reader in language and price. Five new chapters trace the further deepening of the destructive forces of corporate globalization and document the emergence the citizen protest movement dedicated to democracy, economic justice, and environmental sustainability. It concludes that the power and legitimacy of the institutions of the global economy rest on the foundation of a falsified culture. It finds new reasons for hope in both the growing citizen resistance and the evidence of an awakening of cultural consciousness that is preparing the way for deep transformational change." (publisher)


=Description 2=

Dave Pollard:

The need to get corporations out of politics and create localized economies that empower communities within a system of global cooperation, overcoming the myths about economic growth and the sanctification of greed, and focusing instead on overconsumption, poverty, overpopulation, and reining in untrammelled corporate power."
(http://blogs.salon.com/0002007/2006/04/14.html#a1497)
[[Category:Books]]