
=Discussion=

Comments inspired by the experience of David Bollier:

* commons-oriented blogs like the P2P Foundation and others are a good place to reach people.  (See  blogroll at www.bollier.org, for names of commons-oriented websites) Twitter & FB can provide some good publicity to link to such essays, if you can find a stable website to publish it on.

* As far as English-language book publishers, this poses a quandary for us commoners.  Most commercial publishers, even niche publishers that are politically progressive, refuse to publish books with CC licenses, which I find important for reasons of principle and impact. Also, academic publishers like Elgar, Wiley, Routledge, Cambridge, Oxford, etc. cater to the university library market and charge $80-$150 for their books, effectively making them inaccessible to the general public.

* New Society Publishers and Zed Books have published books with CC licenses; the latter actually has a series of books on the commons. Yale University Press has published books with CC licenses, but I get the sense that it was a special case.  Amherst College Press has a very progressive open access/digital publishing platform. Punctum Books is an iconoclastic, academic, peer-reviewed press that routinely uses CC licenses on its books.  

* In terms of political sympathetic book publishers that don't allow CC licenses, you might look at Pluto Press, Verso, Berrett-Koehler, and AK Press.  

* Silke Helfrich and David Bollier have used, for two previous book anthologies, was Levellers Press, a regional press based in  Amherst, Massachusetts, and their self-publishing arm, Off the Common Books.  For the latter, authors pay for the production of the book, but Off the Common Books will distribute and sell it via their own website and Amazon for a per-unit charge of $2 or so.   

(adapted from an email of July 2018)

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Commons]]