

=Description=

'It's one thing to design a trust system that lets people swap games or borrow ladders, but can people be trusted to borrow goods worth thousands of pounds? WhipCar  is demonstrating that they can. It's a peer-to-peer marketplace for cars, where ordinary owners lease their cars on an hourly, daily, weekly or monthly basis to other people in their neighbourhood. Owners set their price, and can accept or reject each booking request as it comes in by email and text.

We asked WhipCar's co-founder, Vinay Gupta, what the company does to give its users the confidence to lease something as valuable as a car.

"We have a cancellation and fines policy plus a code of conduct, and there's fully comprehensive insurance and breakdown cover provided by WhipCar if there's a serious incident. We also have a feedback system to increase security and trust in the market. When owners get a booking request from a driver, alongside that request they'll see their profile photo, how old they are and what previous car owners said about them, with ratings for car care, punctuality and cleanliness.

"For people who use the service, a WhipCar is not necessarily the same as a normal rental car because there's a person associated with the transaction. We have many more positive than negative stories, where people return a car and get it cleaned for the other person, or put more petrol in the car than they received it with.

The service is also limited to 21-70-year-olds with no more than six penalty points on their license, no car-related convictions and no more than two accidents in the last three years.

Trust goes both ways, of course. Those renting can also leave feedback, with ratings for car suitability, punctuality and cleanliness, which is visible to other potential renters. Background checks are made for all cars to make sure they're not on any police database and that they meet WhipCar's insurance criteria. The service is limited to cars no older than eight years to minimise the risk of mechanical problems.

WhipCar only launched in April 2010, but already it's beginning to reach critical mass. It has 3,000 registered cars across the UK, and one within walking distance of most addresses in London. Unlike centrally owned car clubs such as StreetCar where expansion is costly and risky, with WhipCar it's a natural process that simply involves getting the word out.

Rental prices are extremely competitive, with most cars available for between £20 and £40 a day, or £5 to £10 an hour. Being able to drive a Mini Cooper one day and a Land Rover Discovery the next – and never having to worry about MOT and insurance quotes – make it even more attractive. For owners, renting out their car for a couple of hours a week could bring in £1,000 a year. They might feel a little uneasy at first but, ultimately, it's easy money."
(http://www.expertreviews.co.uk/general/1290001/peer-to-peer-living-save-money-by-cutting-out-the-middle-man/)


[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:UK]]