
URL = http://www.paulglover.org/wise.html

=Description=

The Whole Ithaca Stock Exchange (WISE) will enable a wide range of private investors to invest safely in Ithaca to build genuine wealth and security. Everyone, rich and poor, has some type of capital required-- skills, tools, time, topsoil, property, cash. WISE pools this capital, defines program RFPs, issues bonds and negotiables, selects contractors, provides grants and loans to the businesses described below, monitors program progress, redeems bonds by issuing business notes, defines the transferability of bonds. 


GUIDING PRINCIPLES? 

This Mutual Enterprise System retains and expands wealth to provide jobs that clean the environment. It converts capital into harmless and beneficial efforts. It provides basic benefits for all, and special benefits for investors. It transfers technological and economic power to lower-income, building relevant skills. Public benefit is personal benefit, whether we're rich or poor.

HOW IS WISE DIFFERENT than a standard stock market or Community Development Corporation?
   
* investments may be made with other than dollars
   
* repays investors and donors
   
* repays with regional bonds/notes redeemable for services and goods
   
* pays half of interest in advance
   
* elects seats on the Exchange by community rather than by purchase or appointment
   
* businesses are selected which rely on technologies manageable by neighborhoods rather than centralized expertise/machinery, and which reduce pollution
   
* businesses are selected which transfer economic power to community v. agencies which help the poor stay poor
   
* relies on commuity-based market indicators set by the Securities and Ecologies Commission (SEC) rather than narrower profit/loss measures
   
* monetizes tools, skills, crops, soil, volunteer hours, labor hours, development rights transferred (incentive for buyer as well as seller), negawatts, restraint of childbirth, locally-made warranty
   
* regulates transfers of negotiables/bonds among the WISE programs as services available."
(http://www.paulglover.org/wise.html)


[[Category:Money]]