

=Discussion=

Michel Bauwens:

Written during February 2022:

It is very difficult to discuss political polarities without essentializing them in one way or another, and this is more problematic in this area as we are dealing with evolving movements and definitions. Within that polarity, there are furthermore many subdivisions that make simple assessments difficult. But this is how it is, we cannot avoid to talk about it, as the future of human civilization is greatly impacted by the political choices that proceed from these preferences.


So what is the left ? 

This is what I believe I know about it: it started with the French Revolution, when the more radical factions of the French Revolutionary movements started sitting on the left of the democratic assemblies and would become radical democrats or radical liberals. Later on, after the many revolutions in Europe in 1848 but especially after the 1870s (rapid rise of unions and labor parties), a new left arose which was no longer an expression of the ‘petty bourgeoisie’ but of the labor movement and its representatives, in particular under ‘socialist’ banners. It was always split in different factions, but the linkage to labor and socialist ideas was a primary identifier. This started changing again in 1968, and again in 1989. Slowly but surely, the left became more and more associated with identity movements and their civil rights and cultural liberties concerns, while accommodating more and more with the management of then consumption-oriented neoliberal system. The governmental left started standing for a more friendly management of capitalist crises. In terms of ideological hegemony, the influence of marxism declined steadily and postmodern ideas became dominant in the left academia. But underlying these changes was also an important sociological factor: the left became more and more the parties that represented the urban cognitariat, gradually losing its working class base.

My hypothesis is that 1968 stands for a new social contract. Welfare societies were based on a compromise between labor leaders and the elites, but neoliberalism was based on a compromise between identity political leaderships. This is where the seeds were sown, but at a time where inclusive identity politics were entirely legimate and important, and still part of a egalitarian, inclusive and universal premise (the opposite of what woke identity politics would eventually become).

All these combined factors and tendencies underwent a radical qualitative change around 2015, when the Great Awokening became a public phenomena, sweeping through the Anglo-Saxon institutions, academia and media. These were no longer subtle changes, but amount to a Great Reversal. And note that this is at least the third time it has happened in modern democratic history since 1789.

I will address how we can still distinguish the woke movements from the broader left, but first we must address this great reversal:
So the first reversal is around the class issue, with the left now being aligned with the urban cognitariat, and increasingly hostile to working class culture in the so-called ‘culture wars’. My contention is that we have reverted back to a similar situation as in the first half of the 19th cy, where the middle class, the PMC’s, (professional middle classes) is increasingly marked by a divorce with the ‘traditional working class’, and this includes increasingly forms of social racism, as the talk about the ‘deplorables’ (Obama) and ‘unacceptable views’ (Trudeau) exemplify. The hostility of ‘progressives’ against the recent trucker movement is a pivot in this context.

The second reversal is around race. The left was traditionally anti-racist in a sense that could accomodate both the radicals like Malxolm X, and the more moderates like Marin Luther King, while the more racist ideologies like those of the Black Muslims, were out of bounds. The ideal was the egalitarian color-blind society where everyone would be recognized as an equal and based on his merits as a human being, seeing the struggle of minorities as part of a Rainbow Coalition of equals, which included the labor movement. This has been reversed, the woke have adopted explicitly racially essentialist views, desire a society where the surplus is distributed around group membership, and where human dignity is assessed according to an accounting of intersectional points which determine the level of victimhood, which in turn becomes the basis of a new moral hierarchy. To be anti-racist means to actively discriminate and to be in favour of a segregated social logic.

The third reversal is around free speech and democratic pluralism. The historical left in democratic societies (excluding the partisans of totalitarian regimes) was aligned with speech rights, seen as essential for the self-organization of the working classes, and were part of solidly pluralist media landscapes. Today, many of the left are actively engaged in persecutorial cancel campaigns, while left politicians are the driving force between one-sided hate speech legislation, and put pressure on Big Tech, to increase censorship and drive out dissent. The recent organized campaign to destroy Joe Rogan’s capacity to interview dissenting voices is exemplary of this trend, but the number of cancellations number in the thousands. An important driving force is the underlying principle of woke fragility, which believes that dissent endangers the existence of ‘victims’.

We should note that before 1968, all these were the characteristics of important factions of the right wing.

What does this say about the relation about the woke and the ‘left’ in general. One way to look at it is simply to say that the woke are the more radical fraction of the left. In its most radical expression, some opinion polls suggest no more than 8% of the US public agrees with the full gamut of woke opinions. But that would be a severe underestimation of the influence of these ideas on the broader left. My contention would be that if ‘hard wokism’ is a radical and minoritarian faction, only dominant in media and academia, that ‘soft wokism’ is in fact the chaotic attractor of the cognitarian left ‘in general’. So yes, not the whole left is woke, but, substantial parts of the left are contaminated by it to various degrees. Identitarianism, in one form of another, seems to be the ideology of choice.


The facts on the ground are that in the 3 aspects of the Great Reversal, most of the left is on board on all 3:

1) a relative abandonment of working class concerns;

2) a relative acceptance of woke ideology around race

3) a relative hostility to free speech.


Of course there are exceptions. There are still social-populist movements (Sanders) and neo-Marxist groups like Jacobin, and radical politicians like Yanos Varoufakis. But not only are many of them obliged to drift towards wokeness (compare AOC’s speeches today and a few years ago), those that remain steadfast on their association with working class interests, like Sanders or Jacobin, are literally in a situation of blackmail which paralyzes any progress. This was the analysis of Wallerstein apparently and now certainly of Vivek Chibber, the editor in chief of Catalyst, the theoretical magazine associated with Jacobin. He explains very convincingly that whenever the populist grow, as with the Sanders ascendancy in the last primaries, woke coalitions are mobilized to proffer accusations of racism and white supremacy, which effectively killed Sanders in the Georgia primaries.

The principle, demonstrated by various electoral analyses and the work of Eric Kaufmann for example are very clear: wokism and the wokisation of the left affects the cognitariat, what he calls the Anwyere’s,but it does not penetrate the majority of the working population.

Due to these Great Reversals, the first phenomena has been the decade-long drift of the working classes to the right, to national-populist parties and movements, in a new alliance between the people still doing physical work and having working class cultures, and the more territorially linked small businesses.

We are now seeing the second stage. The minorities which are the primary targets of woke reforms against meritocratic selection mechanisms, such as the Asian minority, are seeing an accelerated shift to the right, but even within Latino and African-Americans, we already saw a doubling of the vote. The identification of learning and hard work with white supremacy, in fact targets the middle class ideologies of all groups. Woke may work amongst the academic elites, for whom wokeness means accelerated promotions, but they create resistance in the business-oriented middle classes. Moreover, woke policies around policing and crime are also a huge disaster for the poor, leading to unprecedented crime spikes, which may also end up affecting progressive support amongst the poor.


What this means politically is that a really important drift to the Right seems inevitable in the West. How serious or negative would this be ?

Well, let’s look at the Great Reversal in reverse! This is important because the place that was left open by the ‘left’ (i.e. the 3 former principles and positions that it has abandoned), is now increasingly occupied by the Right.

First of all, in terms of speech, most of the anglo-saxon right that I have seen, have accepted all the civil rights advances of Culture War 1.0, and have become defenders of free speech and pluralism. Anyone subjected to cancel culture attempts will tell you that while your best left wing friends send private messages of support (at best), it will be centrists and conservatives that provide effect support. They were the ones defending Bill Maher in Berkeley, and Joe Rogan in Spotify, and the rights of the truckers to protest in Canada. They are now the defenders of media and academic pluralism, which many on the left try to diminish and destroy.

In terms of race and minorities, most of the right I see is fully on board on civil rights issues, while principled in their anti-racism a la Martin Luther King. And as we know from the 2018 Yale study, they are also less racist in their daily life and attitudes. While the woke left has moved to full scale racialism and segregationism, they are now basically were the left used to be in terms of race, say in 2015.


What about working class concerns ? Obviously , most of the right is wedded to capitalism and markets. 

They are obviously no socialists but I would like to mention a few points:

Ideologically, many of the right are actually moving to a critique of neoliberalism, and to a critique of its globalism. This means policies that are in favour of re-industrialization. They are increasingly hostile to Big Tech and its surveillance and censorship.

In terms of public health policies, they were much more sensitive to the economic and social concerns of working people.

There is a growing group within the right, thinking about more radical reorientations to the working class, and in non-anglo-saxon countries, a revival of solidaristic thinking.


My aim here is not to idealize the situation, but rather to alert you on the direction of the trend. While the left is moving away from working class concerns, significant factions of the right are moving in that direction. My prediction is that if some politician or group does this well, this could really create a potential long term hegemony. All this being said, overwhelming majorities of right wing expression is still largely unconcerned with social issues, and is, like the left, focused on societal issues.

However, there is one deep and over-riding weakness which makes the current right problematic. And that is the ecological issue. Of all what I have seen, it seems most of them do not take climate change seriously, nor resource constraints; there is a deep nostalgia for the middle class lifestyle, and perhaps a belief that if they could just get rid of the crazies, all would be well again. This is of course, a deep and dangerous illusion.
This is why I permit myself to say that if the woke left today stands for the spiritual annihilation of mankind, the right as it stands today may well stand for its physical annihilation.

For the commoners and cosmo-localists amongst us, what this means is there is no ‘perfect’ politics for this transition.


But I would say this:

* Wokeness, with its racial ideology and segregationism, is incompatible with the free association of persons around common projects, regardless of their immutable characteristics

* Free speech and free thinking is an absolute necessity for finding new systemic solutions

* Ecological transformations and policies are essential for our physical survival

* Redistributionist social efforts are essential for our social survival

[[Category:Michel Bauwens]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]