

=Discussion=

Jeremy Brecher:

"Why climate destruction is illegal

The Justinian Code, issued by the Roman Emperor in 535 A.D., defined
the concept of res communes (common things): “By the law of nature
these things are common to mankind — the air, running water, the sea
and consequently the shores of the sea.” The right of fishing in the
sea from the shore “belongs to all men.”

Based on the Justinian Code’s protection of res communes, governments
around the world have long served as trustees for rights held in
common by the people. In U.S. law this role is defined by the public
trust doctrine, under which the government serves as public trustee on
behalf of present and future generations. Even if the state holds
title, the public is the “beneficial owner.” As trustee, the state has
a “fiduciary duty” to the owner — a legal duty to act solely in the
owners’ interest with “the highest duty of care.” The principle is
recognized today in both common law and civil law systems in countries
ranging from South Africa to the Philippines and from the United
States to India.

On Mother’s Day, 2011, the youth organization Kids vs. Global Warming
organized the “iMatter March” of young people in 160 communities in 45
countries, including the United States, Russia, Brazil, New Zealand,
and Great Britain. Concurrently, the Atmospheric Trust Litigation
Project brought suits and petitions on behalf of young people in all
50 U.S. states to require the federal and state governments to fulfill
their obligation to protect the atmosphere as a common property.
Speaking to one of the rallies, 16-year-old Alec Loorz, founder of
Kids v. Global Warming and lead plaintiff in the Federal lawsuit,
said:

Today, I and other fellow young people are suing the government, for
handing over our future to unjust fossil fuel industries, and ignoring
the right of our children to inherit the planet that has sustained all
of civilization. The government has a legal responsibility to protect
the future for our children. So we are demanding that they recognize
the atmosphere as a commons that needs to be preserved, and commit to
a plan to reduce emissions to a safe level.

Loorz concluded: “The plaintiffs and petitioners on all the cases are
young people. We are standing up for our future.”

A trustee has “an active duty of vigilance to ‘prevent decay or waste’
to the asset,” according to University of Oregon law professor Mary
Christina Wood, whose new book Nature’s Trust: Environmental Law for a
New Age lays out the legal basis for the suits. “Waste” means
“permanently damage.” If the asset is wasted in the interest of one
generation of beneficiaries over future generations, it is in effect
an act of “generational theft.”

Although so far the courts have turned down most of these atmospheric
public trust suits, the decisions are being appealed. On October 3,
2013, the Supreme Court of Alaska became the first state supreme court
to hear such an appeal.

A global climate insurgency

Compelling as the logic of the atmospheric public trust argument may
be, it is easy to imagine that many U.S. courts will refuse to force
governments to meet such obligations. In a brief to dismiss the Kansas
suit, lawyers called the claim “a child’s wish for a better world,”
which is not something a court can do much about.

The sad fact is that virtually all the governments on earth — and
their legal systems — are deeply corrupted by the very forces that
gain from destroying the global commons. They exercise illegitimate
power without regard to their obligations to those they claim to
represent, let alone to the common rights beneficiaries of other lands
and future generations to whom they also owe “the highest duty of
care.”

But protecting the atmosphere is not just a matter for governments.
Indeed, it is the failure of governments to protect the public trust
that is currently prompting the climate-protection movement to turn to
mass civil disobedience. Looked at from the perspective of the public
trust doctrine, these actions are far from lawless. Indeed, they
embody the effort of people around the world to assert their right and
responsibility to protect the public trust. They represent people
stepping in to provide law enforcement where corrupt and illegitimate
governments have failed to meet their responsibility to do so.

When the climate protection movement uses nonviolent direct action to
protect the public trust, it is often confronted by government
officials acting under color of law to perpetuate climate destruction.
The Arctic 30 were held at gunpoint, for example, and charged with
piracy. Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev said, “Concern for the
environment must not cover up unlawful actions.” A law-enforcing
climate insurgency will answer: Concern for oil company profits must
not cover up unlawful government complicity in destroying the
atmospheric public trust."
(http://fpif.org/nonviolent-insurgency-climate-protection/)


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]