
'''Article: Intellectual Property Enforcement in Asia: A Reality Check'''

=Source=

International Journal of Law and Information Technology Vol. 13 No. 3
(c) Oxford University Press 2005; all rights reserved
Intellectual Property Enforcement in Asia: A Reality Check
Dr. Assafa Endeshaw1
1 Reader in Information Law, School of Legal Studies, University of
Wolverhampton, Molineux StreetWolverhampton WV1 1SB United Kingdom Fax
No: (44) 1902 322696.
E-Mail: A.Endeshaw@wlv.ac.uk


=Abstract=

In recent decades, Asian nations have raced against each other in
enacting the latest intellectual property (IP) laws borrowed from the
West on the assumption that the laws would function in the same manner
as those in the West. However, the Asian nations' dismal record of
implementation of IP laws has become apparent and turned into a source
of dispute with their trading partners, chiefly the US, the European
Union (EU) and Japan.

The fundamental reason for the impasse in enforcement of IP in Asia,
as elsewhere in the non-industrial world, lies in the huge economic
and technological gap between them and those of the industrial
nations. Historically, the need for international protection of IP
grew out of the desire of a few West European states in the early 19th
century to stop imitations of creative products of their citizens
beyond national borders. The first form of such protection was
therefore an attempt to suppress, within national borders,
illegitimate products affecting businesses operating beyond those
borders. The major concern of countries that became parties to IP
treaties (whether bilateral, earlier on, or multilateral, from the
1880s onwards) was not however about providing the same level of
protection among treaty-members but extending any available measure or
form of protection to non-nationals. The recognition and extent of
international protection ultimately hinged on the assimilation of
non-national goods to those produced within the national borders.

The forms and scope of international IP protection changed
dramatically with the introduction of the Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs). What TRIPs did was to
provide a level of cross-border protection that may or may not have
been existing previously within the national setting. In other words,
TRIPs substituted a structure and mode of protection that never
considered the necessity of linking with or extending national IP
forms and scopes as a pre-condition. In short, TRIPs became
instrumental in planting a veritable disconnect between the IP laws of
non-industrial countries (Non-ICs) and their social and economic
conditions. It did not proceed from the nation-state's willingness or
determination to have forms of protection adequate for its needs (with
the discretion of not introducing any if it did not deem such to be
necessary) but regardless of such needs. The pressure on Non-ICs to
legislate on a par with the major industrial nations (disguised as
compliance with TRIPs requirements), lest they be treated as outlaws
and pirates or the like, burdened them with an obligation unheard of
in international law—that nations must be willing to take on board
legal standards and measures even if the latter might be detrimental
to their own domestic interests. The obligation to adopt standards and
measures consonant with the requirements of the major industrial
states but not necessarily with those of the Non-ICs was not only a
major blow to the pursuit of development in Non-ICs but also a
deadweight they have to carry forever.

The circumstances in which most non-industrial nations were forced to
forego their domestic interests and accede to treaty obligations
without being given corresponding minimal benefits deserving of
sovereign contracting parties lies at the bottom of the disconnect in
the protection of IP internationally. The denial of the prerogative of
non-industrial nations as purportedly full sovereigns in international
law to demand or foster mutually beneficial arrangements in IP
protection has generated the disconnect and fuelled the continuity of
so-called piracy across the non-industrial world.

This paper attempts to examine whether and how Asian nations have
succeeded in managing the disconnect. It starts, in section 1, with a
survey of the common misperceptions about the role of IP. Section 2
then attempts a brief appraisal of the conflicting interests and
forces that condition the level, or lack, of IP lawmaking and
enforcement in Asia. Section 3 briefly looks at the external pressure
on Asian Non-ICs in both IP lawmaking and enforcement. Section 4
traces the signs of change in IP enforcement in Asia. The paper
concludes that, despite some emerging signs of change in attitudes and
levels of IP enforcement, the very same issues will remain at the
forefront of IP in Asia and as a major source of dispute with the US
and, to a lesser extent, the EU and Japan. It stresses that progress
will continue to elude all parties, whether Asian or foreign.


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Policy]]