
'''* Report: Is Smart Green Growth the Solution? Lessons from History. By Carlota Perez. BTTR Working Papers, April 2017'''

URL = http://beyondthetechrevolution.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/BTTR_WP_2017-1.pdf

BTTR: Beyond The Technological Revolution: The Role of the State in Shaping Innovation and Growth.

=Contextual Citation=

"Most commentators are making the historical comparison with the 1930s as a warning
– yet I see it as a positive step towards informing choices for a brighter future.
Understanding how and why that depression was followed by the greatest socioeconomic
boom in history holds lessons for the current situation – lessons that can
move finance towards productive investment in a way that quantitative easing has not."

- Carlota Perez


=Abstract=

"This paper takes a historical perspective to argue for the possibility of a global sustainable Golden
Age, unleashed by the application of a set of policies that takes environmental threats as
opportunities and combines smart green growth with full global development. It discusses why
both of those policy directions would create dynamic demand to promote investment and create
new jobs to compensate technological unemployment. The paper first looks at the historical
patterns in the diffusion of technological revolutions, focusing on the ways in which state action
in combination with technological potential has created ‘golden ages’ after periods of depression
in the past. It analyses the boom that began in the US following the Great Depression and World
War II, and holds that the key to prosperity was the setting of a direction to ‘tilt the playing field’,
creating dynamic demand for the set of products and services typical of the mass production
revolution. It then discusses that, each time around, the tilting implies a redefinition of the ‘good
life’ through accelerating the already visible trends in demand and social values that can be
catered to and fulfilled by the current technological potential. An analysis of the demand-pull
effect of post-war national and international policies follows, before the argument is made that
we now need an equivalent raft of measures to address the inequality that is creating social
unrest today. It ends with a discussion of some of the institutional innovations and policies that
would be required."


=Contents=

#How did the Great Depression lead to the Post-War Golden Age? 
#Why can ‘smart green growth’ be a successful direction now? 
#The role of relative prices in shaping and accelerating the transition 
#The fear of technological unemployment may be unwarranted 
#The lessons of the transition from the 1930s to the post-war boom
#Inequality and ‘differential recession’ as obstacles to visibility and action 
#Why would full global development be in the interest of the advanced world?
#Creating the conditions for the best of possible futures..


=Excerpts=

"My assertion is that the combination of the information and communication
technologies (ICT) with a globalised context requiring sustainable growth, points to a
future in which what I call ‘smart green growth’ is probably the only direction that can
bring the next Golden Age. Other chapters in this book have noted that the trends of
‘dematerialisation’ and a ‘weightless’ economy, which would support such a claim, are
already pointing in that direction. That has been the case with each revolution: what
ends up as a positive-sum game for business and society is initiated with early niche
developments in certain regions and sectors.10 Each revolutionary set of technologies
has been unique, as has the context wherein each surge of development has taken
place. Yet there are clear patterns of diffusion, and of how socio-political choices affect
the potential of each set of new technologies to spread across the entire socioeconomic
fabric to benefit most of society. In this chapter, I will explore how and why
this has happened in the past, and suggest what policy makers can learn from these
historical patterns."


'''From the conclusion''', 'Creating the conditions for the best of possible futures':


The context created by the turning point is one where the combination of threats and
opportunities are at their maximum level. The socio-political turmoil and the
decoupling of finance from production seem to leave leaders impotent to turn the tide.
And yet, there is never a greater opportunity to unleash the best times that the system
can provide. It is a question of tilting the playing field so that the interests of business
coincide with those of the majority of society. Historical experiences can teach us how
to do it; understanding the nature of the ICT revolution can give us the most
appropriate directions in which to stimulate the underlying potential for innovation
and investment.

In this chapter, we have argued that the most appropriate directions in which to guide
the ICT potential are ‘smart green growth’, leading to a constant increase in the
proportion of intangibles in GDP and in lifestyles, and ‘full global development’. Global
reach is in the very nature of ICT, but without sustainability shaping it, the result will
not be development. Both directions would aim at moving finance out of the current
casino behaviour and reconnecting it with real production investment. It has happened
at previous turning points and it can happen again. A win-win game is there to be
unleashed between business and society in every country and between the advanced,
emerging and developing worlds.

Unleashing the power of ICT to bring a sustainable global boom could do for the world
population what the post-war golden age did for that of the Western democracies. To
turn this possibility into probability will require a difficult consensus-building process,
moved by persuasion – or by a serious decline in the world economy. It is to be hoped
that persuasion will succeed in time."

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Ecology]]