
'''= take tasks like translation that used to be done by a single specialist and break them into pieces so a wide range of people can handle different parts of the work'''

=Description=

"CloudCrowd, based in San Francisco, also offers to distribute clients’ work online. Like Microtask, it has found ways to break work into thin slices.

“Rather than crowdsourcing, '''we call what we do widesourcing''',” says Mark Chatow, the company’s vice president for marketing. “We take tasks like translation that used to be done by a single specialist and break them into pieces so a wide range of people can handle different parts of the work.”

CloudCrowd uses machine translation software to make a first pass. Then it sends out individual pages of the machine’s translation to garble hunters, who look for sentences containing a nonsensical sequence. A translator with native language fluency is needed only for the sentences tagged by the garble hunter. An editor, without foreign language expertise, then polishes the prose, but possesses only a single page, not a chapter or the entire work.

CloudCrowd exclusively uses Facebook members who come to it for assignments; it says it has 50,000 workers in its crowd. Traditional translation costs about 20 to 25 cents a word, Mr. Chatow, says, but “we’re doing it for 6.7 cents a word.” He says translators make an average of $15 an hour and garble hunters around $7 an hour."
(http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/31/business/31digi.html)


[[Category:Business]]