'''= an online marketplace for handicraft and design created by small businesses'''

=Description=

"wienett was founded as an online marketplace for
handicraft and design created by small businesses.

More than three years ago, its two founders, Anita
Posch und Martina Gruber, had the idea to create a
sales platform for local products. What wienett aims
for is selling one-of-a-kind handmade and sustainable
products and making them available for the public
at large via sales exhibitions.

At the same time wienett is a community of small
businesses and creative people who jointly run and
further develop the online platform.

On the basis of our experiences with wienett and in
collaboration with a large number of small-scale producers
we created the manifesto Handwerk 3.0 for
the wienett platform in summer 2009."


=Discussion=

==The [[Handwerk 3.0 Manifesto]]==

'''New Work''': What lasts longer is what counts for us.

"In the wienett online shop you find a large selection of
sustainably produced products from the region. Neither
people nor the environment have been exploited
for the products we bring to market. 


This is what we consider important.

- Production in the region

- Fair working conditions

- Ecological aspects

- Products that last

- Handicraft products, i.e. handmade products

- Guarantee the continued existence of the small businesses


'''New Crafts''': We, the wienett team, coined the term HANDWERK
3.0 in the frame of a project and as the title of a sales
exhibition in summer 2009. What we mean with
HANDWERK 3.0 is the renaissance of crafts among
the ‘neue Selbstständige’ (i.e. the new self-employed, a
term that only applies to Austria) and entrepreneurs.
These include crafts such as bookbinding, shoe making,
jewelry design, textile and furniture design etc.

HANDWERK 3.0 demands independent and high
quality design, product sustainability and ethical
manufacture. 3.0 refers to the appreciation of work as
we claim it. It must be self-determined and positive,
and it must create values – for the producers too. Thus
we ask for the end of the exploitation of all the people
working self-employed, not only of those who work in
the creative field. Entrepreneurs create jobs, creativity
derives from diversity.

3.0 also stands for innovation within the crafts –and
here, first and foremost, for the further development
of existing and available manual skills by means of
fresh approaches and with a focus on their actual
application. In this respect we remove creations and
products from their traditionally known contexts and
newly interpret and develop them (as prototypes). The
final result is, ideally, a new, marketable, individual
and local product."
9http://issuu.com/openp2pdesign/docs/cis.doc_open-design)


[[Category:Design]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Austria]]

[[Category:Articles]]