
From Robin Good at
http://www.masternewmedia.org/technical_support/Internet-access/Wi-Fi/WiFi-hotspot-locators-WiFi-sharing-communities-mini-guide-20070304.htm


=Description=

"WiFi hotspots are identifiable through tools (either web- or software-based) called WiFi hotspot locators, which help users find the exact geographic location of all existing WiFi hotspots.

WiFi hotspot locators index WiFi hotspots that can be either commercial or free to use:

   
1. Commercial hotspots require users to authenticate themselves and purchase an Internet pass via credit card or other payment systems such as PayPal; these hotspots are generally located in airports and hotels.

   
2. Free hotspots are open public networks and they don’t require authentication. In this case, free hotspot providers have the disadvantage of not knowing who connects to the router and thus they can't control it by any means; these hotspots are mostly available in parks and public places.

Today, all laptops, notebooks and PDAs are WiFi-enabled and can automatically detect WiFi hotspots while on the go. However, the real issue is often to know where hotspots are exactly located before going to a certain place without having to waste time looking for them.

Another type of WiFi hotspot locator is a completely self-enclosed portable unit which provides the means to "scan" the airwaves at any location, or even while you are driving and detect possible "open" WiFi access points in the surrounding area.

Other alternatives include WiFi hotspots online searchable directories that users can browse when looking for hotspots in specific world locations. These niche search engines devoted exclusively to the indexing of WiFi hotspots often provide such results integrated in a visual map that displays the exact location of the hotspot areas you may have been searching for.

Besides relying on WiFi hotspot locators, users can also decide to join a WiFi sharing community which allows them to share their home WiFi broadband connection and obtain in exchange the possibility to freely connect to the Internet through other WiFi sharing users. This phenomenon is becoming more popular day after day and represents a true new media revolution."
[http://www.masternewmedia.org/technical_support/Internet-access/Wi-Fi/WiFi-hotspot-locators-WiFi-sharing-communities-mini-guide-20070304.htm]


=More Information=

The article above has a directory of products in this category.

See the related entries on [[WiFi Sharing Communities]] and the [[Wireless Commons]] movement.

[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Sharing]]