
*  Article: '''Fuster Morell, M. (2011). The Wikimedia Foundation and the Governance of Wikipedia’s Infrastructure: Historical Trajectories and its Hybrid Character.''' In Lovink, G., Tkacz, N. & Roberts, I. (eds). Critical Point of View Reader, Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2011. 

URL = http://www.networkcultures.org/_uploads/%237reader_Wikipedia.pdf


=More Information=

* Video: [[Mayo Fuster Morell on the Governance Model of the Wikimedia Foundation]]

"Conference Wikipedia: Critical Point of view (CPOV). Institute for the network culture. Presentation: Wikimedia Governance: The Role of the Wikimedia Foundation and the Form and Geopolitics of its Internationalization. Amsterdam, March 2010." [http://vimeo.com/10772313]

* Wikimedia Governance. Wikimania. Presentation. Buenos Aires, From 26 to 29 August 2009. Video [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:200908261415-Mayo_Fuster_Morell-The_governance_of_digital_commons_Wikimedia_Governance_Case_Study.ogg]


* Fuster Morell, M. (2010). Chapter: Representative Foundations model: Wikipedia . Governance of online creation communities. Provision of infrastructure for the building of digital commons. PhD Thesis. Social and Political Science Department. European University Institute (Florence).

* Fuster Morell, M. (2011). Book review: Reagle, J. R. (2010) ‘Good Faith Collaboration: The Culture of Wikipedia’. MIT Press: Cambridge. Journal?Information, Communication and Society. Routledge. ISSN: 1369-118X. Retrieved from http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1369118X.2011.602092

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Articles]]