

=Description=

The Constitution poster is at http://www.wikihouse.cc/static/doc/de9c4224c124733ccd737604f9c0a1a6dc9fe9d4-Constitution_draft_v3.pdf

"The community means anyone who uses, 
adapts or co-develops WikiHouse products 
and tools, or anyone who follows or leads 
the project. Anyone can be part of it, there is 
no formal membership or ‘edge’ to the 
community.

'''Starting a WikiHouse Chapter''': Only the WikiHouse trademark and name are 
controlled. WikiHouse has an open licensing model, a 
bit like a TEDx, but without a TED.
Any team of 2+ people who want to found a 
WikiHouse chapter can sign a copy of the trademark 
license agreement on page 3 of this document, and 
email it to hello@wikihouse.cc.

WikiHouse.cc is Not For Profit: '''Three Basic Rules'''

1 There is no ownership of WikiHouse.cc or 
debt to or from it. It cannot be sold.

2 Whoever raises funding decides how to 
invest it.

3 Any projects to be crowdfunded through 
the platform are listed, costed and the 
allocation of the funds agreed before they 
are posted.

'''Amend this constitution!'''

This is the first version of the constitution, 
drafted by the lead founders. If you think part 
of it should be changed, something should be 
added, or part of it represents - for you - a 
barrier to participation, please propose a 
change in the WikiHouse community space. 

There is, as yet, no democratic process around 
this, but please feel free to suggest one."
(http://www.wikihouse.cc/static/doc/de9c4224c124733ccd737604f9c0a1a6dc9fe9d4-Constitution_draft_v3.pdf)


==Trademark Conditions==

"In signing this Trademark License agreement, we declare the following.

We share the broad common purpose of Wikihouse as a collaborative project: to develop an open source construction system, and afford to as 
many people as possible the capability to design, download, adapt, build and use high-performance products which are suited to their needs.

Enter the chapter name you’d like to use 
WikiHouse chapters are named after their 
geographical location, and take the form of 
a 2-3 letter abbreviation. e.g WikiHouseFR
for France, or WikiHouseRIO for Rio.

If a chapter already exists under the name 
you want to use, take a more local name, 
perhaps even a streetname.

1 Autonomy

We can operate however we like and we own what we do, but we choose 
to share our work and place it into the commons in perpetuity. We do 
not owe WikiHouse anything, and WikiHouse does not owe anything to 
us.


2 Share

We agree to share as much as possible of our work with the world, 
under the CC0 license. We will aim to share our work as soon as we 
reasonably can in compact, standardised and accessible formats.


3 Make shareable 

We aim to design high-performance solutions which are, as far as 
possible, conciously focused on replicability, shareability and low 
thresholds of time, cost and skill.

4 Transparency

We aim to be as transparent as we can be within the limitations of 
time and money, and to always report honestly on our work and 
funding. We promise to always be honest about the limitations of our 
products.


5 Commercial but not Speculative

We will not use WikiHouse to mass produce houses whose primary 
function is as a speculative real-estate asset, rather than as a place to 
live. Either: 

- 1 We are making a house for ourselves to use.

- 2 We are a for-profit or non-profit company who afford end-users control 
over the design and cost of their home. 

- 3 We are a non-profit organisation making houses for unknown users. 

- 4 We are a for-profit company making houses for unknown users but are 
building no more than 5 houses per year.


6 Sustainability

We aim to design as far as possible for materials and components 
which are low-carbon and fully recyclable or biodegradable, and to 
prioritise technologies which conserve water and energy.


7 Make healthy + safe

We aim to design products which are as safe and healthy as possible 
to construct, use, maintain and disassemble.


8 Authorship

We are the authors of our own work, and will give credit whenever 
we practically can to the work and contributions of others in the 
WikiHouse community.



9 Competition

We are free to compete commercially with other members of the 
WikiHouse community within the terms of this agreement, however 
we will always seek to make that competition collaborative, open 
and fair, and to avoid monopoly


10 Complaints & Disputes

We will seek to resolve all complaints or disputes within the 
community directly with the person involved or by emailing 
hello@wikihouse.cc, and then by mediation before arbitration, 
rather than by taking legal action.


11 Liability Waiver

We recognise that we carry total responsibility for our own actions and 
projects, including meeting all legal, insurance and statutory 
requirements relevant to our jurisdiction. We agree to exercise 
appropriate caution when engaging in WikiHouse projects. Neither 
WikiHouse nor other members of the WikiHouse community are in any 
way liable for any harm or loss resulting from our project.



12 Use of this trademark license

This license gives us the right to operate under a WikiHouse chapter 
name, and to describe ourselves as part of the wider WikiHouse 
project. It is ours on a ‘keep it for as long as we are using it’ basis. 


This agreement only applies to...

Anyone can use and share WikiHouse 
hardware and software however they like 
under the terms of the CC0 license. This 
trademark agreement only applies to 
teams who would like to adopt the 
WikiHouse name / trademark as a 
WikiHouse chapter."

(http://www.wikihouse.cc/static/doc/de9c4224c124733ccd737604f9c0a1a6dc9fe9d4-Constitution_draft_v3.pdf)


[[Category:Peergovernance]]