
'''* Book: WikiLeaks: News in the Networked Era by Charlie Beckett. Polity Press. January 2012.'''

URL = 


=Review=

"Beckett is Director of media think tank POLIS at the London School of Economics, while Ball has previously worked for WikiLeaks and is now a Guardian journalist and visiting lecturer at City University. The authors investigate “the most challenging journalistic phenomenon to emerge in the digital era”, focusing on what WikiLeaks represents in the contemporary journalism and media scene.

For those of us who have toiled at the coalface of diplomacy to produce sensitive diplomatic cables, the scale of successive WikiLeaks documents leaks is hard to grasp. Over seven hundred thousand US classified diplomatic cables were released in 2010, alongside damaging US army video clips and plenty more. Nothing remotely on this scale has ever been seen before. What, indeed, does it all mean?

The authors try to bring the sprawling subject under some control by focusing on four areas: the creation of WikiLeaks; the release of the thousands of cables that brought WikiLeaks and Assange into the spotlight; the future of journalism post-WikiLeaks; and social media as a form of disruptive journalism. Beckett and Ball ask how relationships between new and traditional media, their audiences and the government are being ‘renegotiated’. They intertwine detailed behind-the-scenes narrative of the machinations involved in getting WikiLeaks’ material published with operational and philosophical insights into the unfolding significance for journalism of uncontrolled (perhaps uncontrollable) dumping online of official material not intended for public consumption.

WikiLeaks partnered with major media outlets including Der Spiegel, the New York Times and the Guardian to bring the cables to a mass audience. The book points out that the sheer volume of WikiLeaks disclosures probably had less impact than WikiLeaks hoped: the international audience was simply swamped. The book also quotes the astute argument of Gideon Rachman of the Financial Times, that US foreign policy might even derive benefit from the WikiLeaks disclosures: “America’s foreign policy comes across as principal, intelligent and pragmatic. That was, perhaps, the best-kept secret of all”.

The book inevitably says quite a lot about WikiLeaks’ founder Julian Assange and his evolving ambitions and messy motivations. The authors deftly tip-toe round his unpleasant private life, and focus on how Assange grappled in an increasingly frantic way with the practical and philosophical contradictions in his position. His turbulent negotiations with the Guardian  - including a “showdown” between Assange and editor Alan Rusbridger – and other newspapers are fully covered, and his personal contribution to the science of cyber-security fairly noted.

The book’s rather repetitive focus on the impact of WikiLeaks on journalism is less convincing than the authors intended. Why? Because it’s not clear that there is in fact any special impact."
(http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/2012/02/12/book-review-wikileaks-news-in-the-networked-world-by-charlie-beckett-with-james-ball/)


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Books]]