'''Book: Wikiklesia. Volume One. Wikiklesia Project, 2008.'''

URL = http://wikiklesia.wikidot.com/volume-one-portal

= book of readings on the intersection of technology and faith

==Introduction==

By John La Grou:

"This e-book, the
first Wikiklesia Project, is but one milestone among
many in a quickly accelerating, virtually connected
church.

Wikiklesia brings together a diversity of writers
exploring a single theme: the intersection of
technology and faith / religion. Professional and nonprofessional
writers share with equal voice in this
pioneering cooperative experiment. The Internet is
allowing us to congregate and communicate as never
before possible – in ways that just a generation
earlier would have been impossible, and
inconceivable.

Global Christianity is experiencing a profound
structural shift born of Internet convergence. For lack
of better terminology, allow me to call this emerging
phenomenon the microclesia – a shrinking of diverse,
worldwide ecclesial / faith communities into a
participatory “global town square” – a virtual-ecclesial
conversation facilitated by the
microprocessor.

Microclesia (e.g., this e-book) represents a new
global voice in which ideas and imagination, not
structural or positional power, moderate religious
dialogue. Wisdom (see Proverbs) is the new
gatekeeper as spiritual community is reborn in a
rapidly growing network of conversations. In this
pioneering microclesial community, “everyone is a
piece of the puzzle; everyone is essential.”

The global-virtual ecclesia is:

*bridging superficial sectarian and denominational divides
*exploring commonality as much as difference
*maintaining creative relevancy to diverse cultures
*remaining sensitive to our shared humanity and common need for grace
*giving voice to those who had no voice
*re-making institution into imago Dei.

The Wikiklesia Project mirrors an epochal
transformation from passive religious consumers to
engaged co-creators. 

As participants, we are
becoming less intimidated, and less impressed, by
the inherited dualisms of:

*lay vs. clergy
*sacred space vs. secular space
*religious affiliation vs. unaffiliated outsider
*expert and amateur


We are:

*freely integrating as a global body
*learning how to recreate ourselves in unmediated connectedness
*less separated by physical or ideological barriers
*seeking spontaneous questions rather than habitual answers

A kind of collective intuition seems to be
shifting our hopes and dreams from centralized
ecclesial management to shared ecclesial
distribution. Nature itself shows us that virtually any
attempt at artificially “organizing” an inherently self-organizing
system will ultimately fail.

By and large, our inherited religious
framework (catholic, protestant, orthodox, etc.) have
operated independent of one other – each cloistered
within their own theological ghetto. It's not so much
that they co-exist harmoniously. Rather, they're just
rarely required to talk and work with one another.
And that’s been just fine with “them.”

But the Internet is changing the rules of
engagement. There is no longer a “them.” Virtualparticipatory
community is tearing down centuries
of man-made barriers that have kept the Christian
family artificially separated. What will happen as
previously insulated ideologies are increasingly
forced into ecumenical daylight? 

What will the
church look like when:

*institutional power is diluted by waves of collective intelligence
*power centers are shifted from inherited hierarchy to distributed wisdom
*local communities begin to synthesize a globalvirtual array of insight - far beyond the walls of their inherited network

Our Wikiklesia authors intuitively "get" the
bigger picture of an emerging virtual ecclesia. It’s not
a new church franchise or an insular faction, but a
shrinking of the universal body into a true global
town square – a “global home church” where people
congregate 24/7/365 on the strength of empathy,
ideas, and friendship rather than institutional
allegiance or religious programming.

As techno-social tools continue to shrink the
global church - ultimately into a “single place of
meeting” - our collective empathy will increase. New
doors of relational understanding will continue to
open.

”Church” becomes less of a Constantinian
model where we "go" for a "service" - but rather
emerges as a glocal community that is always
engaged in "being" church - 24/7. Local-physical
meetings become more of a celebration and reflection
of what's been happening in our missionally and
virtually engaged lives throughout the week."

John La Grou's intro ends with the following important and ominous question:

Is there a downside to this marriage of
technology and faith?


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Spirituality]]