
'''= project of [[Studio Wikitecture]], 3D wiki that used as a planning took for an architecture project'''

URL = http://slurl.com/secondlife/Architecture%20Island/106/82/24


=Description=
 
"We have already conducted 2 experiments within [[Second Life]] to explore this idea of ‘[[Open Source Architecture]]’. \The following gives a brief overview of the evolving functionality behind Wikitecture 1.0, 2.0, & 3.0.


'''1.0'''

Wikitecture 1.0 was not really a true Wiki in the sense that contributors could not modify or delete the contributions of others. What resulted, although interesting in its own right, was an amalgamation of ‘stuff’ with not no overall coherency or unity - a result we expected.


'''2.0'''

In the 2nd experiment, we asked contributing members to enable full-permissions on every object they added. This new protocol enabled designers to add/modify/delete each other’s designs. In addition, we set up a Flickr Account that allowed contributors to upload descriptive snapshots of their designs and leave feedback as well. With Wikitecture 2.0, we also introduced an archiving system, where members, through community consensus, were able to roll-back the ‘live’ design to previously saved iterations. Although this system was still rudimentary, the resultant design was far more unified and coherent than Wikitecture 1.0.


'''3.0'''

For our 3rd experiment, however, we have continued to try and improve upon this underlying technology. In teaming up with i3D inc., experts in creating virtual applications that cross the 2D/3D divide, we have developed both an in-world interface (’wiki-tree’) and external website that continually communicate with each other. From the in-world perspective, contributors are able to archive their particular design into an abstract ‘leaf’ within a 3-dimensional ‘tree canopy’. As this canopy grows, the branching network of ‘leaves’ communicates to other designers, how related all the different designs are to each other.

In addition, to fully communicate their vision and rationale behind their designs, this interface will allow contributors to take snapshots of their designs and, combined with descriptive commentary, upload them to the external website.

Since there will be multiple designs iterations within the ‘tree canopy’ and only a limited amount of land, the ‘wiki-tree’ interface, by touching the leaves, will allow members to ‘rez’ out the designs, one by one, onto the viewing parcel. Once rezzed out, viewers are then able to immerse themselves, 3-dimensional, in the design. In addition, to augment the experience of actually occupying the space, the three screens in the viewing kiosk near the ‘wiki-tree’ will allow users to cycle through the snapshots and comments associated with the active design on the viewing parcel as well. This viewing kiosk will become especially helpful for those who want to communicate their designs informally with a smaller group of individuals.

The ‘wiki-tree’ allows the community, in turn, to vote and comment on their fellow contributor’s designs."
(http://studiowikitecture.wordpress.com/2007/10/31/phew-finally-the-official-kick-off-meeting-for-wikitecture-30/)


=More Information=

#Architecture Island in Second Life, http://slurl.com/secondlife/Architecture%20Island/106/82/24
#Wikitecture at http://studiowikitecture.wordpress.com/ and http://www.studiowikitecture.com/


[[Category:Design]]