

'''= a project testing ways of using the post-hoc accreditation of learning activities as a way of replacing high-stakes assessment in education systems'''


URL = http://wikiquals.wordpress.com/


=Description=

"WikiQuals is a project testing ways of using the post-hoc accreditation of learning activities as a way of replacing high-stakes assessment in education systems. WikiQuals is based on the Emergent Learning Model and is part of a process to test the “formal” part of the model, concerning post-hoc accreditation. It also relates to the Ambient Learning City project which is focussing on new forms of organising the social processes of learning and testing, both of which are based on the Open Context Model of Learning by Learner-Generated Contexts. This is discussed in detail on the Heutagogic Archives blog and best viewed on the Craft of Teaching 2011 slides.

'''History''':

The actual WikiQuals project came about when a group of UCL graduates asked me @fredgarnett in the Spring of 2011 to design a Masters level learning programme for when they graduated in 2011. We agreed to use the University Project weekend at Hub Westminster in October 2011 to plan the programme based on these ideas/discussions. At the Workshops Vlad  Atanasiu from Bucharest CROS – Centrul de Resurse pentru Organizatii Studentesti was very keen on setting up a WikiQuals project in Rumania; which is now actively being developed for 2012/13.  From the University Project workshops a Ph.D WikiQuals group came together which was launched on December 21st 2011 with our first 8 Sqolars. Newest recruit is WQ11 Oliver Ashton. Currently I am working with all nine to clarify their aims and ambitions and how they can be supported by such concepts as Affinity Partners.

Blog; We have now uploaded a series of blog posts developing the WikiQuals idea practically. The WikiQuals proposition,  Show and Tell as an assured learning process, the WikiQualsPh.D and more on post-hoc accreditation processes. We now have the planning in place for the first year of WikiQuals, which will be 2012 effectively. We will use the About section to update the publishing schedule for the blog and provide info about our first group of Sqolars and Affinity Partners (previously we called them JourneyMen and JourneyWomen after the medieval guilds names)."
(http://wikiquals.wordpress.com/about/)


=More Information=

* [[Open Accreditation]]


[[Category:Education]]