
'''= an online community credit rating platform'''

URL = http://www.wikirating.org/wiki/Wikirating:Summary


=Description=

"Wikirating is an online community credit rating platform. It aims to be an independent and transparent source of credit rating information, issued, reviewed and corrected by a worldwide community of individuals and experts. Wikirating is an independent project and is not connected in any way to Wikipedia or to Wikipedia Foundation.


The recent financial crisis and the resulting economic collapse have shown a serious lack of transparency, efficiency and neutrality regarding assessments on financial risks. Banks, companies and even countries have based their risk and credit estimations on financial data provided by few major and well established rating agencies, and it is now obvious that these ratings were not reliable and that rating methods needs to be drastically improved and controlled. The exaggerated power and influence of the credit rating industry has strongly motivated the idea of Wikirating. The analyses on credit worthiness of countries and governments issued by the rating industry have been too long over rated, and whereas governments are trying to regulate the rating and assessments activities, Wikirating offers a platform where anyone can contribute for better, open and more transparent credit risk assessment.



In the very first place Wikirating aims at federating a community of people who want to participate in providing better, more transparent and open financial rating data and methods. Our mission is to give everyone a chance to contribute to this project, and our vision is that a community of worldwide individuals and experts might have much more influence than public attempts to regulate the rating industry. If, like us, you also see this need and this challenge, we are strongly counting on you to spread the word and to start contributing to Wikirating. Our short term goal is to reach a community of active users to the Wikirating project. Our middle and long term goal is to make from Wikirating a serious alternative to the current private rating agencies.'
(http://www.wikirating.org/wiki/Wikirating:Summary)


=Status=

Strategic alliance with [[Public Sector Credit Solutions ]], see [http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/180943211.html]



[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Money]]