
* Article: A FREE IRRESPONSIBLE PRESS: WIKILEAKS AND THE BATTLE OVER THE SOUL OF THE NETWORKED 
FOURTH ESTATE. Yochai Benkler.

URL = http://benkler.org/Benkler_Wikileaks_current.pdf

WORKING DRAFT for forthcoming Harvard Civil Rights - Civil Liberties Law Review


=Excerpt=

First paragraph:

"Wikileaks was born a century after President Theodore Roosevelt delivered the speech that gave 
muckraking journalism its name, and both hailed investigative journalism and called upon it to be 
undertaken responsibly. Four years after its first document release, in 2010, Wikileaks became the 
center of an international storm surrounding the role of the individual in the networked public sphere.
 
It forces us to ask us how comfortable we are with the actual shape of democratization created by the 
Internet. The freedom that the Internet provides to networked individuals and cooperative associations 
to speak their minds and organize around their causes has been deployed over the past decade to 
develop new networked models of the fourth estate. These models circumvent the social and 
organizational frameworks of traditional media, which played a large role in framing the balance 
between freedom and responsibility of the press. At the same time, the Wikileaks episode forces us to 
confront the fact that the members of the networked fourth estate turn out to be both more susceptible 
to new forms of attack than those of the old, and to possess different sources of resilience in the face of  these attacks. In particular, commercial owners of the critical infrastructures of the networked 
environment can deny service to controversial speakers, and some appear to be willing to do so at a 
mere whiff of public controversy. The United States government, in turn, can use this vulnerability to 
bring to bear new kinds of pressure on undesired disclosures in extralegal partnership with these private 
infrastructure providers."


[[Category:Open Data]]

[[Category:Security]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Articles]]