
=Characteristics=

Will Ruddick:

"What does a decentralized economic currency system look like - when combining all these approaches:
    

==Fair distribution and circulation of a network token== 

– which can act like a large scale medium of exchange. A version of the Duniter (G1) Universal Dividend or Circles UBI Smart Contract suffices – but controlling for inflation via taxation. Note that a myriad of NTs can exist and incorporate other rules and still have markets that connect them together. Hence a whole range of NTs and localized systems that use them could form with different local rules and rules that connect them. Note that in the Sarafu Network Token Kenya case, the Sarafu supply is currently voted on by committee - but this will be subject to change in 2021.


==Discouraging hoarding:== 

A holding tax is a simple form of this. Some of this tax can be destroyed to stabilize the monetary mass (supply)


Rewarding good behaviors via tax redistribution: An algorithmic system that determines good behavior – given this is voted on. This could involve MANY metrics (see SDGs). A voting system that allows users to specifically endorse candidates this could use quadratic and or conviction voting system. Note that we have not yet implemented a voting system yet and use clustering pTNACC as a basis for distributing Sarafu on a weekly basis.


==Localized currency creation with connect-ability== 

The ability to create credit systems for businesses and community projects and connect them to others: CICs being created using this NT as a reserve – gives people the ability to label tax and leverage the NT to create a promissory note against future production (See Bancor Protocol for smart contracts here). 


Note that many types of tokens can be added to a reserve pool for a CIC (including the possibility of Carbon credits, Stable coins and so on). Also note that a CIC need not have any reserve if there is no exchange between other CICs. In which case a CIC is simply a promissory note against future production. Localized CIC creation was available in in 2019 and has been put on hold for all of 2020 and will reopen with some modifications (namely to the target reserve ratio being 100% hence no leverage) in January 2021!


==Connected CIC and Price stabilization== 

Finally we want labor and commodity price stabilization for the NT as well as the CICs. Given the ability to fix the supply of each – prices of goods and services can stabilize by virtue of arbitrage between markets of CICs themselves. Note that less than 100% target reserve ratios will be added back over time based on standard development and regulatory compliance for custodial systems - non custodial systems can have a lot more freedom."
(https://www.grassrootseconomics.org/post/currency-supply-taxation-and-redistribution?)

[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:Crypto Economy]]
[[Category:Money]]