
'''* Article (draf): Exploring the Maker-Industrial Revolution: Will the future of production be local? Bu Anna Waldman Brown. BRIE, October 20, 2016'''

URL = http://www.brie.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/BRIE-Working-Paper-2016-7.pdf

=Description=

From the introduction:

"Many	believe	that	modern	technologies	such	as	3D	printers,	sensors,	and	networking	capabilities	provide	an	unprecedented	opportunity	to	support	a	renewal	of	localized	production— especially	when	combined	with	“Maker	Movement”	trends	toward	
customization,	user	engagement,	local	and	small-batch	production,	and	reparability.	

Others	are	unconvinced,	and	instead	forecast	increased	efficiency	in	high	volume	production	and	global	supply	chains.	Let	us	state	the	core	questions:	will	either	the	Maker	Movement	or	these	dramatic	new	technologies	fundamentally	influence	the	basic	structures	of	market	competition?	Or,	will	this	all be	merely	an	interesting	but	marginal	blip	along	the	road	as	the	technologies	themselves	are	absorbed	into	automated	high	volume	production?		What	are	the	clues?	What	do	decision-makers	across	industry	and	policy	need	to	know	in	order	to	properly	evaluate	this potential?
With	this	paper,	we	look	beyond	the	revolutionary	rhetoric	of	the	Maker	Movement	in	an	attempt	to	consider	its effects	on	a	more	practical	level.	We	define the	Maker	Movement	(also	known	as	the	Do-It-Yourself	or	Fab	Movement)	as	a	crusade	for	more	accessible	design	and	creation— incorporating	a	mix	of	new	technologies,	philosophies,	and	business	models.	This	Movement	is	especially	tied	to	the	concepts	of	digital	
fabrication,	public	access	to	tools	through	community	workshops	(Fab	Labs,	
hackerspaces,	makerspaces,	repair	cafés,	TechShops,	etc.),	the	Internet	of	
Everything/interconnected	devices,	and	Jeremy	Rifkin’s	concept	of	the	“zero	marginal	cost	society.”	We	employ	a	vague	definition	here	because	the	concept	itself	is	nebulous	and	ill-defined;	depending	upon	whom	one	asks,	this	Movement	is	a	“bourgeois	passtime,” the “new	industrial	revolution,” the	future	of	interdisciplinary	education,	the	impetus	for	a	wealth	of	new	hardware	startups,	and/or	yet	another	overhyped	and	impossible	vision	of	techno-utopia.

This	essay	will	focus	upon	whether	or	not	the	Maker Movement	might substantially	
disrupt	traditional	manufacturing,	or	alternatively	at	least	create	an	enduring	niche."


=More Information=

* Maxigas	and	Peter	Troxler,	“Digitally-Operated	Atoms	vs.	Bits	of	Rhetoric:	A	Mash-Up,”	Journal	of	Peer	
Production,	no.	5	(October	2014),	http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-5-shared-machine-shops .

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Articles]]