

=Example=

==The [[Middelgrunden Wind Turbine Cooperative]] in Copenhagen, Denmark==

Wolfgang Hoeschele:

"An urban example of this is the Middelgrunden Wind Turbine Cooperative, formed in 1997,
which partnered with the Copenhagen municipal utility to build 20 wind turbines of 2MW
capacity each, off the shore of Copenhagen. Københavns Energi, the municipal partner,
has since then merged with several other companies to form the private energy company
DONG Energy. The cooperative owns 10 of the turbines, while the other 10 are owned by
DONG Energy. Over 8,500 people who mostly live in or around Copenhagen own the
40,500 shares of the co-op. The cooperative is organized as a partnership, and each
partner has one vote, regardless of the number of shares. One wind turbine is a “children’s
wind turbine” – shareholders have had their children vote on their behalf and thereby
participate in the decision-making process, learning how to organize a sustainable future
as cooperation between people.

The cooperative benefits from the support of the Danish association of owners of wind
turbines (founded in 1978 as Danske Vindkraftvaerker, later renamed Danmarks
Vindmølleforening). This association has successfully lobbied the national government to 
create favorable conditions for the expansion of wind energy. In part due to its activities,
cooperatives accounted for around 50 percent of Danish installed wind energy capacity in
the 1980s to early 1990s, and 20 percent of installed capacity today."
(https://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2(1).pdf)


=Status=

"Results:

• The wind turbines were completed by 2001, and the output of the cooperative’s
turbines has been varying from 40-45,000 MWh in the last several years.
• This is one of many examples in Denmark of wind power being produced as a
result of the collective efforts of individuals interested in wind power.
• There is high public support for wind power in Denmark, due in no small part to the
fact that ordinary people, not just some distant shareholders, are direct
beneficiaries."
(https://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2(1).pdf)

=More information=

Resources:

* FEASTA report on Denmark’s wind cooperatives: http://feasta.org/documents/shortcircuit/index.html?sc5/windguilds.html.

* Middelgrunden cooperative bylaws: http://www.middelgrunden.dk/middelgrunden/?q=en/node/72

* English translation of Danish Promotion of Renewable Energy Act of 2008:
http://www.ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/supply/renewable-energy/wind-power/onshore-windpower/Promotion%20of%20Renewable%20Energy%20Act%20-%20extract.pdf

[[Category:Energy]]

[[Category:Cooperatives]]