Concept defined by Jon Husband at http://wirearchy.com/

"A shift, from command-and-control to champion-and-channel, is occurring in many spheres of human activity. When customers have more power and employees want to communicate and be heard, the dynamics have to change.

The impact of hyperlinked, horizontal and vertical networks is beginning to be felt, creating new dynamics in organizations and emergent forms of organized endeavours.

A new organizing principle is emerging, called Wirearchy ...

a dynamic two-way flow of power and authority based on information, knowledge, trust and credibility, enabled by interconnected people and technology"
(http://wirearchy.com/)



"What Is Wirearchy ?

We all know and understand hierarchy - it is the organizing principle of the institutions that govern us and in which we work and live. The people at the top control the agendas and make the decisions.

And yet...

taking decisions and managing organized activities are being impacted in powerful ways by interconnected networks of people and technology. The Internet is connecting customers, employees and communities and empowering them with information in ways never before possible.

A shift, from command-and-control to champion-and-channel, is occurring in many spheres of human activity. When customers have more power and employees want to communicate and be heard, the dynamics have to change.

The impact of hyperlinked, horizontal and vertical networks is beginning to be felt, creating new dynamics in organizations and emergent forms of organized endeavours.

A new organizing principle is emerging, called Wirearchy ...

a dynamic two-way flow of power and authority based on information, knowledge, trust and credibility, enabled by interconnected people and technology

Wirearchy will continue to emerge and have impact. The generations coming into the workplace have interactive games, ICQ, Napster and chat rooms under their skin. They're equipped with smarter software, and they take interconnectedness for granted - it's second nature to them."
(http://wirearchy.com/)

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Business]]