
= participant in the [[Europe Commons Deep Dive]]

=Bio=

"A sociologist and historian by training, Wojtek Kalinowski is co-director of
the Veblen Institute for economic Reforms, a think tank based in Paris and
promoting ideas for social and ecological transition towards a more
sustainable economy. He writes regularly about monetary reforms, social
issues and more broadly about ecological economics topics. He worked
previously as journalist at the French monthly Alternatives Economiques, as
scientific editor at the Institute for research on governance and, in the
years 2004-2008, as editor-in-chief of the French journal La Vie des Idées.
Wojtek Kalinowski holds Master and postgraduate D.E.A. degrees from Uppsala
University in Sweden, the University of Paris (Sorbonne), and the Ecole des
Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales (Paris). Polish by birth, he lived in
Sweden for many years before arriving in France in 1998."


=Publications=

==English-language==

* Monetary Innovations and the Social-Ecological Transition by Wojtek Kalinowski.

URL = http://www.veblen-institute.org/Monetary-Innovations-and-the?lang=en

A system founded on the principle of monetary pluralism and on a variety of actors authorized to issue such currencies would be more resilient in the face of speculative attacks than our current “monetary monoculture”, and far more conducive to endogenous territorial development.

==French-language==

* '''Vers l’économie soutenable.  Du développement durable  à l’économie d’état stationnaire'''

URL = http://www.veblen-institute.org/IMG/pdf/note_idies_22_bat.pdf

Comment intégrer  les limites de la biosphère dans la macroéconomie et dépasser  le débat entre croissance et décroissance ? 


* Les innovations monétaires dans la transition social-écologique. par Wojtek Kalinowski 

URL = http://www.veblen-institute.org/Les-innovations-monetaires-dans-la?lang=fr

Pour relever les défis sociaux et environnementaux de notre époque, le système monétaire devrait être fondé sur le principe de la complémentarité des monnaies. 

=More Information=

# www.veblen-institute.org



[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:France]]

[[Category:Policy]]