'''= author of the book: The [[Economics of Abundance]]. A Political Economy of Freedom, Equity, and Sustainability. Gower, 2010''' [http://www.gowerpublishing.com/isbn/9780566089404]. Wolfgang Hoeschele criticizes systems faults in our present economy such as only scarce goods having economic value, and explores solutions based on creating abundance.

==Bio==

Wolfgang Hoeschele received his BA in biology and art from the College of Wooster in Ohio (1987), his MS in environmental science from Washington State University (1990), and his Ph.D. in geography from the Pennsylvania State University (1998). He worked as professor of geography at Truman State University in Missouri from 1998 to 2014. His early research focused on land degradation in southern India, and on devising a classification system for countries in the world economy. His more recent work has consisted of a critique of our current economy of scarcity, and conceptualizing an economy of abundance - an economy that does not seek to create profitable scarcities, but rather that seeks to enable all people, and an abundance of animal and plant species, to thrive, now and in the future. He now lives in Heidelberg, Germany, where he is building a new career as freelance policy consultant. He is currently engaged in a [http://commonsabundance.net/2016/01/12/rethinking-economy-laying-the-foundations-for-an-economics-of-abundant-life/ systemic analysis] of the systems faults in our current political economy, and on how these could be corrected. Corrections include giving a larger purpose to the economy as well as to individual businesses, linking property rights with work and responsibiliy through institutions such as cooperatives and commons, reorganizing finance as a public infrastructure, introducing a self-determined service for the common good as an opportunity for paid work available to everyone, and introducing new methods of governance to enable effective economic democracy. 

Publisher's website of his book, "The Economics of Abundance: A Political Economy of Freedom, Equity and Sustainability" can be found here:
(https://www.routledge.com/The-Economics-of-Abundance-A-Political-Economy-of-Freedom-Equity-and/Hoeschele/p/book/9780566089404)

Wolfgang Hoeschele's personal webpage: http://whoeschele.de/en/economy-of-abundance-of-life/

More information on the book on the P2P Foundation site: [[http://p2pfoundation.net/Economics_of_Abundance]]

==More Information==
* [[Abundance]]
* Information about the book, The [[Economics of Abundance]], via http://www.gowerpublishing.com/isbn/9780566089404
* Example: Applying abundance to cities, http://shareable.net/blog/how-to-create-abundant-cities


[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Commons Economics]]
[[Category:Urbanism]]
[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]
[[Category:USA]]