

=Discussion=

Silvia Federici:

"A feminist perspective on the commons is important. It
begins with the realization that, as the primary subjects of reproductive work, historically
and in our time, women have depended on access to communal natural resources more
than men and have been most penalized by their privatization and most committed to
their defense. As I wrote in Caliban and the Witch (2004), in the first phase of capitalist
development, women were at the forefront of the struggle against land enclosures both in
England and in the “New World” and they were the staunchest defenders of the
communal cultures that European colonization attempted to destroy. In Peru, when the
Spanish conquistadores took control of their villages, women fled to the high mountains
where they recreated forms of collective life that have survived to this day. Not
surprisingly, the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries saw the most violent attack on
women in the history of the world: the persecution of women as witches. Today, in the
face of a new process of Primitive Accumulation, women are the main social force
standing in the way of a complete commercialization of nature, supporting a non-
capitalist use of land and a subsistence-oriented agriculture. Women are the subsistence
farmers of the world. In Africa, they produce 80% of the food people consume, despite
the attempts made by the World Bank and other agencies to convince them to divert their
activities to cash-cropping. In the 1990s, in many African towns, in the face of rising
food prices, they have appropriated plots in public lands and planted corn, beans, cassava
"along roadsides...in parks, along rail-lines.." changing the urban landscape of African
cities and breaking down the separation between town and country in the process.12 In
India, the Philippines, and across Latin America, women have replanted trees in degraded
forests, joined hands to chase away loggers, made blockades against mining operations
and the construction of dams, and led the revolt against the privatization of water.13
        
The other side of women’s struggle for direct access to means of reproduction has
been the formation across the Third World, from Cambodia to Senegal, of credit
associations that function as money commons (Podlashuc, 2009). Differently named, the
tontines (as they are called in parts of Africa) are autonomous, self-managed, women-
made banking systems that provide cash to individuals or groups that have no access to
banks, working purely on a basis of trust. In this, they are completely different from the
microcredit systems promoted by the World Bank, which function on a basis of mutual
policing and shame, reaching the extreme (e.g., in Niger) of posting in public places
pictures of the women who fail to repay the loans, so that some women have been driven
to suicide.
        
Women have also led the effort to collectivize reproductive labor both as a means
to economize the cost of reproduction and to protect each other from poverty, state
violence, and the violence of individual men. An outstanding example is that of the ollas
communes (common cooking pots) that women in Chile and Peru set up in the 1980s
when, due to stiff inflation, they could no longer afford to shop alone.15 Like land
reclamations, or the formation of tontines, these practices are the expression of a world
where communal bonds are still strong. But it would be a mistake to consider them
something pre-political, “natural,” or simply a product of “tradition.”
        
After repeated phases of colonization, nature and customs no longer exist in any
part of the world, except where people have struggled to preserve them and reinvent
them. As Leo Podlashuc has noted in “Saving Women: Saving the Commons,”
grassroots women's communalism today leads to the production of a new reality, it
shapes a collective identity, it constitutes a counter-power in the home and the
community, and opens a process of self-valorization and self-determination from which
there is much that we can learn.
        
The first lesson we can gain from these struggles is that the ‘commoning’ of the
material means of reproduction is the primary mechanism by which a collective interest
and mutual bonds are created. It is also the first line of resistance to a life of enslavement
and the condition for the construction of autonomous spaces undermining from within the
hold that capitalism has on our lives. Undoubtedly the experiences I described are models
that cannot be transplanted. For us, in North America, the reclamation and commoning of
the means of reproduction must necessarily take different forms. But here too, by pooling
our resources and re-appropriating the wealth that we have produced, we can begin to de-
link our reproduction from the commodity flows that, through the world market, are
responsible for the dispossession of millions across the world. We can begin to
disentangle our livelihood not only from the world market but also from the war machine
and prison system on which the US economy now depends. Not last we can move beyond
the abstract solidarity that so often characterizes relations in the movement, which limits
our commitment, our capacity to endure, and the risks we are willing to take."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/federici-feminism-and-the-politics-of-commons.pdf)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Gender]]