WorkNets 

URL = http://www.worknets.org 


a culture of, by and for independent thinkers, organized by [[Andrius Kulikauskas]] (ms AT ms DOT lt) of Minciu Sodas http://www.ms.lt


=Principles=

By Franz Nahrada [http://www.worknets.org/wiki.cgi?GlobalVillages/Principles]:

"The general features of this new culture that is emerging and finally
might be captured in a Worknets charter seem to be the following for me:

1. All our work is based and focused on the work of creative, dedicated
individuals who follow their deepest values and strive to share their work
with others who do the same. We arrive at a point in history where finally
the individual is really in focus, not as abstract being, but as a special
contributor to a wealth of contributions.

2. We seek the voluntary collaboration and community with those who
encourage us and make us grow in the perseverance of our goals, as much as
we seek to encourage others. This is true in the global and the local
scale, although at the beginning it might be much easier to find such
resonance in the Internet than in our physical surrounding. Without this
resonance we cannot work.

3. We deeply miss in the current educational system a sensitivity for such
individual "calling" and a system of encouragement to reach our highest
possibities and attain answers for our actual questions.

4. We want therefore decide to create a mutual support system to challenge
each other and hold us accountable for what we have declared as our
central personal values - rather than follow abstract belief systems. We
wish everybody to succeed. We think that this will lead us to the "best of
all possible worlds".

5. We value science and competence as elements that are indispensible
steps of mastering our goal. We feel that every goalsetting unveils
questions that we cannot currently answer and things that we cannot yet
do. Knowing and artfulness are universal goals. We want everybody to learn
and know more. We already know that we live far below our possibilities.

6. Our contribution as "Worknets" to the emerging world of peer production
and commons is a network of "embedded mentoring" and constant productive
dialogue. We see the personal relations that help us grow as necessary
contribution; as well as individual responsibility and leadership. We want
everybody to grow into leadership.

7. Our goal is also to reach out to the ones that are hard to reach. The
proof of our concept is a world where nobody is left out.

8. We do not limit ourselves to any particular culture, ideology or
religion, but we appreciate the sense of transcendence that is the base to
all these phenomena: that the human nature is by its very nature bound to
seeking durabilty and meaning beyond our limited individual vanishing
lives. God is no delusion, but a form in which this search for our true
self appears.

9. We want to build an infrastructure to facilitate not only the
communicative process, but the process of living out or goals. The
infrastructure will be informational, but it will also be physical. An
important part of this infrastructure will be Global Villages."
(http://www.worknets.org/wiki.cgi?GlobalVillages/Principles)


[[Category:Movements]]