=Discussion=

==We should abandon the work ethic==

* Frase, Peter. Hipsters, food stamps, and the politics of resentment. Jacobin. 2011 Winter; 1:27–30. 

Available from: http://jacobinmag.com/winter-2011/hipsters-food-stamps-and-the-politics-of-resentment/. 

"Frase traces the roots of the work ethic to resentment felt by those who have submitted to the unpleasant discipline of capitalist employment, and who envy others who are perceived to have eluded its arduous yoke. Such resentment often motivates hostility to the beneficiaries of public-assistance programs. The envious rationalize their resentment by what Frase calls producerism, the belief that social rewards should accrue to those who produce society’s goods and services. Frase points out that post-industrial capitalism has undermined any rational basis that producerism may once have had, because of the increasing disconnect between economic reward and socially valued production. At the same time, the increasingly harsh conditions of employment (and unemployment) have increased the resentment that is the real source of the emotional connection to the work ethic. Frase concludes by urging the abandonment of the work ethic in favor of an ethic of economic and social rights."
(http://dedicto.com/wordpress1/bib/)


* Maisano, Chris. Take this job and share it: on loving work and hating freedom. Jacobin. 2011 Winter; 1:3–6. 

Available from: http://jacobinmag.com/winter-2011/take-this-job-and-share-it/. [anchor]

"Maisano takes the perspective that “the animating principle of the Left is not so much equality, but rather freedom”, and accordingly proposes that drastic reduction of the work week and improvement in the quality of life at work should be a higher priority for the Left than production and distribution of goods. Citing Marxist literature, including Paul Lafargue’s “The right to be lazy” (1883) and work by Harry Braverman, André Gorz, and Marx himself, Maisano argues that the 20th- and 21st-century Left has lost out by accepting capitalist production methods and Taylorist management, with their attendant evils of consumerism, the work ethic, and the glorification of material production. The recent financial crisis, together with a conservative political climate and modern capital-intensive industry, will doom many workers to chronic unemployment and many more to long hours at low-paid service jobs with poor working conditions unless the Left can achieve widespread reductions in work time."
(http://dedicto.com/wordpress1/bib/)


=More Information=

==Bibliography==

* Lafargue, Paul. The [[Right To Be Lazy]]. Translated by Charles Kerr. 1883. 

Available from: http://marxists.org/archive/lafargue/1883/lazy/. Accessed 2012 May 26. Other formats available from: http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Paul_Lafargue__The_Right_To_Be_Lazy.html. 

"Lafargue attacks the work ethic from a Marxist perspective. Uncharacteristically for a Marxist, he is highly critical of the working class, condemning them for having internalized an ideology that had originally been imposed on them by capitalists. Profit and ideology motivate mass production beyond any limit of human need or even of market demand, leading to deflationary recessions, deterioration of product quality, exhaustion and degradation of workers, and hostile competition of workers against each other for jobs. Increased efficiency of production through automation exacerbates all of these evils as long as the work ethic is still accepted. Lafargue advocates a return to the disdain for work that had been characteristic of ancient pre-capitalist aristocratic elites, with heavy use of automation to avoid the ancient reliance on slavery. Lafargue proposes legislation to limit human physical labor to a strict maximum of three hours a day."
(http://dedicto.com/wordpress1/bib/)


[[Category:Labor]]