
'''* Report: Common Cause. The Case for Working with our Cultural Values. by Tom Crompton. By WWF-UK et al., September 2010'''

URL = http://www.foe.co.uk/resource/reports/common_cause_report.pdf

==Excerpts==

===Values and behaviour are intimately connected===

"There is a large body of evidence about the way in which people’s values are
organised across cultural contexts, and this report reviews some of these results.
In particular, two research findings are of importance: 

First, people’s values
tend to cluster in remarkably similar ways across cultures; 

second, the relationship between different values is such that
some sets of values can easily
be held simultaneously while others oppose one another .

[This evidence is
summarised in the main report, in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. But, because it is of central
importance to the subsequent arguments that are constructed in this paper, the
research is also examined in more detail in Appendix 1.]

A person’s values comprise
an integrated and dynamic system, such that activating one particular value affects
other values (activating compatible values and suppressing opposing values).

Any communication or campaign will
inevitably serve to convey particular
values, intentionally or
otherwise People’s decisions are
driven importantly by the values they
hold – frequently unconsciously, and
sometimes to the
virtual exclusion of a
rational assessment of
the facts. Values comprise
an integrated and
dynamic system, such
that activating one
particular value affects
other values (activating
compatible values and
suppressing opposing values).

Simplified, the work presented here on values points to a distinction between two
broad classes of value: intrinsic or self-transcendent values, and extrinsic or self-
enhancing values [Section 2.1 and Appendix 1].

Intrinsic values include the
value placed on a sense of community, affiliation to friends and family,
and self-development. Extrinsic values, on the other hand, are values
that are contingent upon the perceptions of others – they relate to envy
of ‘higher’ social strata, admiration of material wealth, or power.

These two classes of value act in opposition.

For instance, to the extent that a
person considers the intrinsic value of ‘community feeling’ (which includes the desire
to improve the world through civic involvement) to be important, they are less likely
to place importance on the extrinsic value of ‘financial success’ (which encompasses
an individual’s desire for money, possessions and his or her envy of those who have
these things). Indeed, these two values are almost perfectly opposed. But note,
of course, that this is not to neglect the importance of relative financial success
for people who have too little money to live decently [see Section 2.1 for further
discussion of this point].

Intrinsic values are associated with concern about bigger-than-self
problems, and with corresponding behaviours to help address these
problems. Extrinsic values, on the other hand, are associated with lower
levels of concern about bigger-than-self problems, and lower motivation
to adopt behaviours in line with such concern [Section 2.3 and Appendix 2].

The evidence for this is drawn from diverse studies and investigative approaches,
and represents a robust body of research results. So, pursuing the example
above, experimental studies show that
a strong focus on financial success
is associated with: lower empathy, more manipulative tendencies, a
higher preference for social inequality and hierarchy, greater prejudice
towards people who are different, and less concern about environmental
problems. Studies also suggest that when people are placed in resource
dilemma games, they tend to be less generous and to act in a more
competitive and environmentally-damaging way if they have been
implicitly reminded of concerns about financial success.

Of course, extrinsic values
can motivate helpful behaviour, but this will only happen
where extrinsic goals can be pursued through particular helpful behaviours: for
example, buying a hybrid car because it looks ‘cool’. The problem is that, in many
cases, it is very difficult to motivate helpful behaviours through appeals to extrinsic
values, and – even when successful – subsequent behaviour tends to relapse into that
which is more consistent with unhelpful extrinsic values. Moreover, such strategies
are likely to create collateral damage, because they will also serve to reinforce the
perceived importance of extrinsic values, diminishing the importance of intrinsic
values and undermining the basis for systemic concern about bigger-than-self
problems. So responding to an understanding of the integrated nature of values
systems requires that communicators and campaigners should consider
both the effects of the values that their communication or campaign will serve to activate (and
therefore, as will be discussed, also tend to strengthen)
and the knock-on effects of
their campaigns on other values (some of which may be helpful, others unhelpful).

A range of factors (such as a person’s upbringing, their exposure to social norms in
the media, or the values held by their role-models) determine which of the full range
of values are particularly important for an individual (and these can change with
circumstances). In determining a person’s concern about bigger-than-self problems,
it seems that what is important is not whether an individual holds extrinsic values
per se (this is probably inevitable), but rather the
relative importance that he or she
attaches to extrinsic as opposed to intrinsic values. So it should not be concluded
that bigger-than-self problems will only be properly addressed if extrinsic values
are expunged. But it is crucial, from the point of view of concern about bigger-than-
self problems, to ask how intrinsic values can be encouraged and extrinsic values
discouraged.

'''Values can be strengthened culturally'''

Values can be both activated (for example, by encouraging people to think about
the importance of particular things), and they can be further strengthened, such
that they become easier to activate. It seems that one way in which values become
strengthened is through their repeated activation[see Section 2.5]. This may occur,
for example, through people’s exposure to these values through influential peers, in
the media, in education, or through people’s experience of public policies.
It is sometimes argued that self-interested values are inevitably dominant (perhaps
because these are biologically innate, for example). There is mounting evidence that
this is not the case [see Section 2.6]. But even if it were the case, this would serve
to underscore the importance of ensuring, so far as possible, that cultural cues
contribute to activating and strengthening intrinsic values.


'''An understanding of values must be incorporated into civil society campaigns'''

As discussed, on the one hand, simply conveying information about bigger-than-self
problems is likely to leave many people unmoved – or perhaps even more resistant to
change. On the other hand, appeals to values that are in opposition to the emergence
of widespread concern about bigger-than-self problems are likely to contribute to
further strengthening these values culturally. What alternative response might be
developed?

This report builds the case that bigger-than-self problems will
only be systemically
addressed through the conjunction of:

• An understanding of the effect of cultural values upon people’s motivation to
change their own behaviour or to demand change from political and business
leaders.

• An understanding of the range of factors that activate and strengthen some
values rather than others.

• Widespread public debate about the ways in which government, business and
civil society organisations serve to strengthen particular values through their
communications, campaigns and policies."

===Frames offer a vehicle for promoting values===

"This report then brings two streams of research alongside one another: 

i) studies in social psychology and sociology which examine the importance of particular values
in motivating concern about bigger-than-self problems (that is, the work discussed in
the section above); and ii) research on the importance of
‘frames’ as vehicles for
working to activate and strengthen helpful values [See Section 3].

Frames are of key importance in thinking about values and how these are activated
and strengthened culturally. [Section 3.1 introduces frames.]

“Frames”, writes the
cognitive scientist George Lakoff, “are the mental structures that allow human
beings to understand reality – and sometimes to create what we take to be reality.
[T]hey structure our ideas and concepts, they shape how we reason, and they even
impact how we perceive and how we act.” 

Some cognitive scientists use the term ‘deep frames’ to refer to cognitive structures
held in long-term memory that contain particular values. They tend to be relatively
stable but they are not unchanging or unchangeable.

Work on framing is often misunderstood: it is sometimes assumed that framing is
just about ‘getting the message right’ – as though a particular choice of language can
motivate us, en masse, to want to embrace a particular worldview.

‘The message’ is of course important in activating particular frames, but it is only the
beginning [Section 3.2] . Conceptual framing (crafting wording and phrasing to
focus on particular issues) will not have an effect unless these messages resonate
with a set of deep frames.

So there’s an important distinction between processes that lead to the
activation of frames, and processes that help to
strengthen frames (that is, make frames more easily activated).

[This distinction is discussed in the context of values in Section 2.5,
and in the context of frames in Section 4.3.]

‘Activation’ refers to the process of eliciting particular frames. Once culturally
established, a deep frame can be activated very easily through the use of just a few
words (for example, the phrases ‘War on Terror’ or ‘tax relief’ activate deep frames
relating to a whole understanding of security or the proper role of government,
respectively). What is of particular interest is how deep frames are strengthened
– that is, how a deep frame comes to be more easily activated through the use of
simple cues. Crucially, activation of a frame through use of particular language is
an important way of helping to strengthen it – repeatedly activating a frame has
the effect of making it easier to activate.

But language doesn’t stand alone. It
is part and parcel of the institutions and policies that we live with and
interact with. Deep frames (and therefore the values that these embody)
are activated and strengthened through many aspects of our lived
experience – including our experience of living with particular public policies and
social institutions.

There is a mutual process by which public policies and social institutions shape
our deep frames, which in turn shape our policies and institutions. For example,
interacting with particular policies or social institutions such as the electoral system,
aid agencies, planning policy, or the national health service, has an effect upon which
deep frames come to dominate. Research on policy feedback reveals that – perhaps
unsurprisingly – public policy has an impact in shaping dominant public values,
which in turn impacts on public support for new policies [Section 3.2] .


'''Deploying an understanding of frames raises profound ethical issues'''


The power of deep frames to promote particular values-based agendas is well known.
It is something to which many political interest groups have responded. For example,
George Lakoff argues that American neo-conservatives have assiduously set about
establishing “their deepest values into the brains of tens of millions of Americans”,
by working to strengthen deep frames consistent with their politics. There is some
evidence for similar effects in a UK political context [Section 3.2], though not in an
analogous party-political way.

An understanding of deep frames can be hugely powerful to political strategists
attempting to build public support for their programmes. Unfortunately, the
way in which this understanding is deployed is not always transparent, and this
lack of transparency may be seen to serve the interests of those designing these
programmes: while deep frames provide a set of extremely powerful tools, working 
with them can be seen as manipulative – and it is undoubtedly the case that this
perception is sometimes justified.

But that is not to suggest that framing can be exposed and then ignored – any more
than an understanding of the importance of values in motivating public concern
about bigger-than-self problems can be ignored. We think, inescapably, in terms
of frames, and any communication therefore necessarily conveys a set of frames –
whether it does so deliberately or inadvertently. In the same way, any public policy
creates expectations on the part of a citizen – an understanding about their role and
that of government, for example – and this, too, serves to activate and strengthen
particular deep frames. There is no such thing as value-neutral policy.

So deep frames won’t go away – they structure our thinking, and will probably
continue to be deployed by political interest groups of all political persuasions. How,
therefore, should civil society organisations respond to an understanding of the
importance of deep frames? 


Two responses are needed:

* Civil society organisations should champion public scrutiny of, and debate about, the role of deep frames in activating and strengthening particular values culturally, and the consequences of this.
* Employing utmost transparency, civil society organisations should deploy an understanding of deep frames in their own public-interest communications and campaigns, thus helping to strengthen values that will leave society better positioned to tackle bigger-than-self problems. In doing so, these organisations should take scrupulous care to explain to their audience what deep frames a communication or campaign is intended to activate (and therefore strengthen), and why this is important.

'''Examples of frames that may be important in tackling bigger-than-self problems'''

In this report,
three pairs of deep frames [Section 3.5]
are presented that seem likely to be of significance in influencing the cultural importance accorded to the helpful values discussed earlier. Each example was developed by drawing, in part,
on the specific survey items used to establish these values
[these survey items are presented in detail in Appendix 2] .

In time, important frames will need to be identified and validated through empirical
methods."
(http://www.foe.co.uk/resource/reports/common_cause_report.pdf)

===The Three Frames===

These three pairs of frames are summarised as follows:

====‘Self-interest’ versus ‘common-interest’ frame====

According to the
self-interest frame, individuals inevitably and properly pursue their
own self-interest, and this interest is to be assessed primarily through individual
cost-benefit calculations conducted in economic terms.

There is an analogy between the individual and the nation-state. Nation states will
inevitably, and rightly, operate in their own economic self-interest and there is no
scope for the morality of shared wealth in international relations. International
alliances are therefore inherently unstable, and will begin to break down as soon as
the national interests of individual states begin to diverge.

In contrast, the common-interest frame
views individuals as inherently concerned
about both themselves and others, and the value that they place on these things
cannot be fully captured in economic terms. People, other living things and nature
have an inherent value that is irreducible to economic value. Freedom is to be
assessed through the extent to which people are unconstrained in developing as
human beings in the manner they desire. Individual nation states are part of an
international community with many shared dependencies and responsibilities.

Note that these two frames include two dimensions that are conceptually distinct,
but which are very closely associated psychologically: the extent to which people
value common interest above self-interest, and the extent to which such interests are
to be assessed in economic terms. Of course, conceptually, it’s perfectly possible to
value common interest and to assess this interest economically. But for psychological
reasons [discussed in Section 3.5.1]
a deep frame that conveys the importance of
self-interest is also likely to establish the importance of assessing this interest in
economic terms.

====‘Strict father’ versus ‘nurturant parent’ frame====

George Lakoff suggests that there is a direct correspondence between models of
family and models of a nation. In particular, he highlights two different ideals for the
family – the strict father and the nurturant parent family, and he suggests that these
two different models produce deeply contrasting views on individual freedom and
the role of government. These two concepts are of course key in Western society, and
comprise important frames in relation to action on bigger-than-self problems.

The strict father frame
emphasises the role of government in exercising authority
and control, of establishing moral order, commanding obedience, and punishing
dissent. It views social support for people who are less fortunate as morally
dubious, because people’s misfortunes arise as a result of their own lack of
discipline and morality. By comparison, the
nurturant parent frame
stresses the role of government in ensuring social justice (built upon empathy for everyone) and
responsibility towards others.

Although these frames were developed as a result of analysis of the deeply partisan
American political context, it is nonetheless important to explore them in a UK
context: the strict father frame is still of great importance in UK political thought.

These frames underscore the importance of conceptual metaphors
for understanding political visions. Conceptual metaphors project a frame that we know well (for
example, ‘family’ or ‘battle’) on to something more contested (‘the nation’ or one’s
career trajectory) [Section 3.3]). Adaptation of these frames to a UK political context
would necessarily be less partisan – for example, elements of progressive thinking
from both left and right are found in variants of the nurturant parent frames.

====‘Elite governance’ versus ‘participative democracy’ frame====

"The elite governance frame
holds that political power is properly consolidated in
the hands of elites. People cannot be trusted to solve their own problems through
deliberative means: strong leaders must take control and act on their behalf. It is
important to note that this frame is quite powerful among some sections of the
environment movement – with some environmentalists openly questioning whether
democracy can respond to environmental problems with sufficient speed.

In contrast, according to the
participative democracy frame, citizens hold political
power, and should exert their influence through effective organisation. The
government is of the people, by the people, and for the people – the question becomes
one of how to make citizen participation in democratic process more effective."

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:P2P Ethics]]