{{RightTOC}}
=Discussion=

==The WSF as Critical Utopia==

[[Boaventura de Sousa Santos]]:

“Utopias have their timetable”, says [[Ernst Bloch]].

The conceptions of and aspirations
to a better life and society, ever present in human history, vary as to form and content
according to time and space. They express the tendencies and latencies of a given epoch
and a given society. They constitute an anticipatory consciousness that manifests itself
by enlarging the signs or traces of emerging realities. Does the WSF have a utopian
dimension ? And, if so, what is its timetable ?

The WSF is a set of initiatives — of transnational exchange among social
movements, NGOs and their practices and knowledge of local, national or global social
struggles against the forms of exclusion and inclusion, discrimination and equality,
universalism and particularism, cultural imposition and relativism, that have been
brought about or made possible by the current phase of capitalism known as neoliberal
globalisation. The utopian dimension of the WSF consists in claiming the existence of
alternatives to neoliberal globalisation.

As [[Franz Hinkelammert]] says, “we live in a time of conservative utopias whose utopian
character resides in its radical denial of alternatives to present-day reality”.2 The possibility of
alternatives is discredited precisely for being utopian, idealistic, and unrealistic. Under
neoliberalism, the criterion is the market. The total market becomes a perfect institution. Its
utopian character resides in the promise that its total application cancels out all utopias.
What distinguishes conservative utopias such as the market from critical utopias is the fact
that they identify themselves with present-day reality and discover their utopian dimension
in the radicalisation or complete fulfilment of the present. Moreover, if there is unemployment
and social exclusion, if there is starvation and death in the periphery of the world system,
that is not the consequence of the deficiencies or limits of the laws of the market; it results
rather from the fact that such laws have not yet been fully applied. The horizon of conservative
utopias is thus a closed horizon, an end to history.

This is the context in which the utopian dimension of the WSF must be understood.

The WSF signifies the re-emergence of critical utopia, that is, of a radical critique of presentday
reality and the aspiration to a better society. This occurs, however, when the anti-utopian utopia of neoliberalism is dominant. The utopian dimension of the WSF consists
in affirming the possibility of a counter-hegemonic globalisation; it is a radically democratic
utopia. In this sense, the utopia of the WSF asserts itself more as negativity (the definition of
what it critiques) than as positivity (the definition of that to which it aspires).

The specificity of the WSF as critical utopia has one more explanation. For the
WSF, the claim of alternatives is plural, both as to the form of the claim and the content
of the alternatives. The other possible world is a utopian aspiration that comprises
several possible worlds. It may be many things, but never a world with no alternative.
Yet the question remains : once the counter-hegemonic globalisation is consolidated,
and hence the idea that another world is possible is made credible, will it be possible to
fulfil this idea with the same level of radical democracy that helped formulate it ?"

==The World Social Forum as Epistemology of the South==

Boaventura de Sousa Santos:

"Neoliberal globalisation is presided over by technico-scientific knowledge, and owes its
hegemony to the credible way in which it discredits all rival knowledge, by suggesting
that they are not comparable, as to efficiency and coherence, to the scientific nature of
market laws. This is why the practices circulating in the WSF have their origin in very
distinct epistemological assumptions (what counts as knowledge) and ontological
universes (what it means to be human). Such diversity exists not only among the
different movements but also inside each one of them. The differences within the feminist
movement, for instance, are not merely political. They are differences regarding what
counts as relevant knowledge, on the one hand, and on the other, differences about
identifying, validating or hierarchising the relations between western-based scientific
knowledge and other knowledges derived from other practices, rationalities or cultural
universes. They are differences, ultimately, about what it means to be a human being,
whether male or female. The practice of the WSF also reveals, in this context, that the
knowledge we have of globalisation is much less global than globalisation itself.

To be sure, many counter-hegemonic practices resort to the hegemonic scientific
and technological knowledge paradigm, and many of them would not even be thinkable
without it. This is true of the WSF itself, which would not exist without the technologies
of information and communication. The question is : to what extent is such knowledge
useful and valid, and what other knowledges are available and usable beyond the limits
of utility and validity of scientific knowledge ? To approach these problems raises an
additional epistemological problem : on the basis of which knowledge or epistemology
are these problems to be formulated ?

Science is doubly at the service of hegemonic globalisation, whether by the way
in which it promotes and legitimates it, or by which it discredits, conceals or trivialises
counter-hegemonic globalisation. Hegemony presupposes a constant policing and
repressing of counter-hegemonic practices and agents. This goes largely hand in hand
with discrediting, concealing and trivialising knowledges that inform counter-hegemonic
practices and agents. Faced with rival knowledges, hegemonic scientific knowledge
either turns them into raw material (as is the case of indigenous or peasant knowledge
about biodiversity) or rejects them on the basis of their falsity or inefficiency in the
light of the hegemonic criteria of truth and efficiency. Confronted with this situation,
the epistemological alternative proposed by the WSF is that there is no global social
justice without global cognitive justice.

This alternative is grounded on two basic ideas. First, if the objectivity of science
does not imply neutrality, science and technology may as well be put at the service of
counter-hegemonic practices. The extent to which science is used is arguable inside the
movements, and it may vary according to circumstances and practices. Second, whatever
the extent to which science is resorted to, counter-hegemonic practices are mainly
practices of nonscientific knowledge, practical, often tacit knowledges that must be
made credible to render such practices credible in turn.

The second point is more polemical because it confronts the hegemonic concepts
of truth and efficiency directly. The epistemological denunciation that the WSF engages
in consists of showing that the concepts of rationality and efficiency presiding over
hegemonic technico-scientific knowledge are too restrictive. They cannot capture the
richness and diversity of the social experience of the world, and specially that they
discriminate against practices of resistance and production of counter-hegemonic
alternatives. The concealment and discrediting of these practices constitute a waste of
social experience, both social experience that is available but not yet visible, and social
experience not yet available but realistically possible.

The epistemological operation carried out by the WSF consists of two processes
that I designate as sociology of absences and sociology of emergences. I speak of sociologies
because my aim is to critically identify the conditions that destroy non-hegemonic and
potentially counter-hegemonic social experience. Through these sociologies, social
experience that resists destruction is unconcealed, and the space-time capable of identifying
and rendering credible new counter-hegemonic social experiences is opened up. The
following description of the [[Sociology of Absences]] and the [[Sociology of Emergences]] represents
the ideal-type of the epistemological operation featured by the WSF."


==The World Social Forum as Political Emergence==

"The newness of the WSF is more unequivocal at the utopian and epistemological level
than at the political level. Its political newness does exist, but it exists as a field of
tensions and dilemmas, where the new and the old confront each another. The political
newness of the WSF resides in the way in which these confrontations have been handled,
avoided, and negotiated.

Generally speaking, the political novelties of the WSF can be seen, first, in terms of
the very broad conception of power and oppression that it seems to have adopted, and which
responds to the fact that neoliberal globalisation is linked with many other forms of oppression
that affect women, ethnic minorities, peasants, the unemployed, workers of the informal
sector, immigrants, ghetto sub-classes, gays and lesbians, children and the young. This
requires that movements and organisations give priority to the articulation amongst them,
and ultimately explains the organisational novelty of a WSF with no leaders, its rejection of
hierarchies, and its emphasis on networks made possible by the internet.

Second, the WSF strives for equivalence between the principles of equality and of
recognition of difference, grounding the option for participatory democracy, which
addresses equality without the exclusion of difference.

Third, the WSF privileges rebellion and non-conformity at the expense of revolution.
There is no unique theory to guide the movements, because the aim is not so much to
seize power but rather to change the many faces of power as they present themselves in
the institutions and sociabilities. At this level, the novelty consists in the celebration of
diversity and pluralism, experimentalism, and radical democracy.

It has become common to examine the WSF’s political experience in terms of
problems and tensions at three levels : representation, organisation, political strategy and
political action. According to its Charter of Principles, the WSF does not claim to be
representative of counter-hegemonic globalisation, and no one represents the WSF nor
can speak in its name. But then : whom does the WSF represent ? Who represents the
WSF ? The WSF’s restricted geographical scope so far has led some critics to affirm that
the WSF is far from having a world dimension. Some proposals have been made in this
regard, including the decision to hold the fourth WSF in India. While this problem is
real, I believe that the WSF must not be de-legitimised for not being worldwide enough.

A second, hotly debated question is the WSF’s organisation, particularly the
relation between the Organising Committee (OC) and the International Council (IC),
the organisation of each of the three Porto Alegre Forums, and each event’s structure.

These aspects have raised many issues, which I cannot discuss at length here. (See other
essays in this section, and other sections in this volume — Eds). Among the most
discussed are : internal democracy, including issues of transparency of decisions and
the articulation between the IC and the OC; the hierarchical structure of the events,
chiefly the distinction among different kinds of sessions and the importance accorded
to each, a feature of which feminist movements have been particularly critical (following
the two mottos —‘Another World is Possible !’ and ‘No One Single Way of Thinking’);
and the top-down organisation of the events.

A third site of tension and critique is the relation with political parties, social
movements, and NGOs. The Charter of Principles is clear on the subordinate role of
parties in the WSF. The WSF is an emanation of civil society as organised in social
movements and non-governmental organisations. In practice, however, things are
ambiguous.11 In my mind, the issue is not whether relations with parties should exist
or not, but rather to define the exact terms of these. If the relations are transparent,
horizontal, and mutually respectful, they may well be, in some contexts, an important
lever for the consolidation of the WSF.

A fourth area of contestation is size and continuity. To the steady increase in the size
of the annual event, the IC has responded with a proposal to stimulate theme and regional,
national and local events, that intercommunicate horizontally and that will not be articulated
as preparatory for one another but as meetings with their own political value.
Finally, there are issues of strategy and political action. As a radical utopia, the WSF
celebrates diversity, plurality, and horizontality. The newness of this utopia in Left thinking
cannot but be problematical as it translates itself into strategic planning and political action.

The organisers themselves acknowledge many of these tensions and criticisms,
which suggest that these tensions are part of the Forum’s learning process. Some measures
have been suggested, including the current restructuring of the IC and a deepening of
horizontal organisational practices and systems of co-responsibility. Although it is clear
that much remains to be done, it is fair to say that the WSF’s organisational structure was
the most adequate to launch the Forum and render it credible internationally. The current
consolidation of the WSF will lead it to another phase of development, in which case its
organisational structure will have to be reconsidered so as to adjust it to its new demands
and tasks ahead. For now, it should be acknowledged that the desire to highlight what
the movements and organisations have in common has prevailed over the desire to
underscore what separates them. The manifestation of tensions or cleavages has been
relatively tenuous and, above all, has not resulted in mutual exclusions. It remains to be
seen for how long this will to convergence and this chaotic sharing of differences will last.

The last point concerns precisely this, the notion of cleavages. Here again we
find a site of political novelty. There is a meta-cleavage between western and nonwestern
political cultures. Up to a point, this meta-cleavage also exists between the
North and the South. Given the strong presence of movements and organisations of
the North Atlantic and white Latin America, it is no wonder that the most salient
cleavages reflect the political culture and historical trajectory of the Left in these parts
of the world. What is most instructive however, is that despite the reality of the cleavages
that could be at play — reform or revolution; socialism or social emancipation; the
State as enemy or potential ally; national and global struggles; direct action or institutional
action; and that between the principles of equality and difference — it is clear that
what is new about the WSF is that the majority of the movements and organisations
that participate in it do not recognise themselves in these cleavages. They have political
experiences in which there are moments of confrontation alternating or combining
with moments of dialogue and engagement. In these long range visions of social change
cohabit the tactical possibilities of the moment, in which radical denunciations of
capitalism do not paralyse the energy for small changes when the big changes are not
possible. Indeed, many movements of the South think that no general labels — even
Left and Right — need be attached to the goals of the struggles.

According to the large majority of the movements, these conventionally conceived
cleavages do not do justice to the concrete needs of concrete struggles. The decision on
which scale to privilege, for instance, is a political decision that must be taken in accordance
with concrete political conditions. Similarly, for many movements it is no longer a question
of choosing between the struggle for equality and difference, but of articulating one with
the other, for the fulfilment of either is condition of the fulfilment of the other.

Nonetheless, there is a cleavage among the movements and even, sometimes, inside
the same movement on whether priority should be given to one of these principles. Concrete
political conditions will dictate which of the principles is to be privileged in a given struggle.

Any struggle conceived under the aegis of one of these two principles must be organised so
as to open space for the other principle. Many of the tensions and cleavages mentioned
above are not specific to the WSF, but belong to the legacy of struggles over the past 200
years. The specificity of the WSF resides in the fact that all these cleavages co-exist in its
bosom without upsetting its aggregating power. The different cleavages are important in
different ways for the different movements and organisations, providing room for action and
discourse. Second, there has so far been no tactical or strategic demand that would intensify
the cleavages by radicalising positions. On the contrary, cleavages have been fairly low
intensity. For the movements and organisations in general, what unites has been more
important than what divides. Third, if a given movement opposes another in a given cleavage,
it may well be on the same side in another. In this way are precluded the accumulation and
strengthening of divergences that could result from the alignment of the movements in
multiple cleavages. On the contrary, the cleavages end up neutralising or disempowering
one another. Herein lies the WSF’s aggregating power."





=Source=

* Article: The WSF : Challenging Empires. Toward a Counter-hegemonic Globalisation. [[Boaventura de Sousa Santos]].

Edited version of part of a paper presented at the XXIV International Congress of the
Latin American Studies Association, Dallas, USA, March 27–29, 2003.



=More Information=

# [[World Economic Forum on Impact of Web 2.0 and Emerging Social Network Models]] [http://gaia.world-television.com/wef/worldeconomicforum_annualmeeting2007/default.aspx?sn=197]
# [[World Social Forum as a Complex Civil Society Network]]
# [[World Social Forum as New Model of International Governance]]
# [[History of the World Social Forum and the Alterglobalization Movement]]


[[Category:Global Commons]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]