'''What''':	The World We Want

'''When''':	October 27-28  

'''Where''':	To be determined

'''History''':	

'''Who We Are''': Community members, policymakers, business and civic leaders, service providers, action agencies, educators and researchers, media, faith leaders and others who are involved or interested in community-led approaches to community problem solving.

'''You're Invited''': This conference is for community members, policymakers, business and civic leaders, service providers, action agencies, educators and researchers, media, faith leaders and others who are involved or interested in community-led approaches to community problem solving, their friends and anyone else to come together, make connections, have fun, do as much good work as each and every one of us can. Then we will go home, more connected, energized and capable of doing more and more of whatever we call good in the world. Come join a good party getting better! ...and bring your good friends, too!

Since you are reading this invitation, we know that someone thought you might be interested in joining this work. Please join us to make good things happen!

Are there other people you feel should receive this invitation?  Please add them to this [[invitation list]] with a contact if possible. You may also email Linda at lindern at gmail dot com

* What kind of good things are happening because of the work you are doing in the world?
* What do you need to do in order for more good things to happen as a result of the work you really want to do?
* What skills, resources, gifts and connections do you have to share?
* What would happen if you could grow and get and share?

Come to Bangkok and find out!

'''Be Prepared''': We are opening this space for meeting, for learning, for connecting, for acting, and for good. We don't know what is going to happen. We are imposing no limits, no agendas -- only the charge to come and learn and contribute as much as you can. Be prepared to be surprised by the results!

'''Agenda''': Any issue of real importance to you can be added to the agenda. It will be discussed and addressed to the greatest extent possible. All of the key points and next steps will be captured and offered online, so that more good people can be invited into more and more good action.

'''Spirit''': We invite your presence, onsite and/or online. Please pass this invitation on to others you see leading and doing good work. We need you to add your spirit to the many, many connections that are happening now. Online or onsite, please bring the stories of your progress, your skills and insights, and your passion for what can happen next. Be ready to make more good things happen.

'''Format''': This gathering is the product of many actions and connections. This space is an invitation to make more of them, and more of us, flow more together, to the good. The format will be one of powerful self-organization, informed directly by the practices of  [http://www.michaelherman.com/cgi/wiki.cgi?OpenSpaceTechnology Open Space Technology]. The participants will be smart, caring, creative and connected leaders, organizers, activists and instigators. Beyond this, the space will be wide open for us to make good things happen.

'''Registration and Payment''': First, either put your name on the [[The World We Want Participants]] page or email Linda at lindern at gmail dot com to tell us you're coming '''or''' interested in coming. Then, visit the [[payment page]] for instructions on how to make your contribution of 1000 to 4000 baht to cover meeting space, snacks, materials and facilitator with any surplus going to fund conference  projects or a randomly drawn charity. A list of [[lodging]] (also see [[Have lodging? Need lodging?]]) and [[meal options]] will be provided so that you can easily arrange those things for yourself.


'''Direct Invitation List''': I have compiled a list of [[NGOs in Thailand]] with contacts.

We are looking forward to meeting and working with you in October, to make good things happen!

'''Conveners''': Linda Nowakowski, Michael Herman, Jim Puntasen