=Description=

Chor Pharn :

"The idea of world-machines belongs to the writer and systems theorist Venkatesh Rao. In a series of essays and the collaborative reading project Contraptions Book Club, he proposed that history can be read as a succession of machines, each built to coordinate a planet increasingly aware of itself. The first “modernity machine,” he suggests, was assembled between 1200 and 1600, during the Mongol and Islamic ages of exchange. It ran on navigation, accounting, and gunpowder. Around 1600, it gave way to the industrial-financial order that powered the modern world. Each machine, he notes, takes about four hundred years to build before being “switched on” in a single generation; each is designed to solve the bottleneck left by its predecessor. The industrial machine solved the bottleneck of energy; the financial machine solved the bottleneck of capital. The next one, he believes, will have to solve the bottleneck of continuity.

The language of machines is useful because it restores the sense of engineering to history. Civilisations are not just stories or ideas; they are systems of coordination. They depend on synchrony—between state and market, law and technology, mind and infrastructure. When that synchrony fails, progress becomes noise. The world of 2025 is noisy in precisely this way. Artificial intelligence learns faster than governments can legislate; markets revise themselves faster than societies can adapt; ecosystems react over centuries to decisions made in minutes. The question that binds these crises together is not one of morality or ideology but of tempo. Who, or what, will keep the clocks in time?"

(https://thecuttingfloor.substack.com/p/the-mnemonic-stack)

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:Mutual_Coordination]]
[[Category:Time]]