
'''* Article: “The [[World-Historical Cycles]],” from The Earth in the Sun’s Embrace. [[Alexander Chizhevsky]]. In the book: [[Russian Cosmism]]. edited by Boris Groys'''

https://syllabusproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/the-world-historical-cycles-alexander-chizhevsky-.pdf

Translated from: ''Alexander Chizhevsky, Kosmicheskiy pul’s zhizni: Zemlya v obyatiyakh Solntsa. Geliotapaksia [Cosmic pulse of life: Earth in the Sun’s embrace], (Moscow: Mysl, 1995), 478–491.''

=Description=

"Starting with the assumption that the historical distribution of popular
mass movements is determined by solar force via its impact on the human
neuropsychological apparatus—by increasing excitability and sharpening
the people’s reflexes—I have found it necessary to make a detailed analysis from this perspective of all the historical materials my research has
accumulated.

To this end, I have engaged in a specific psychiatro-psychological analysis of each historical event under consideration. I have studied in detail the
various changes and fluctuations in the course of the masses’ psychological
processes, insofar as these processes may be detectable through specialized
forms of historical inquiry. By “psychological processes,” I mean mass sentiments of a certain kind, which find objective expression in the corresponding conduct of the masses and those who lead them. I have conducted this work from perspectives both psychological and psychiatric, making
detailed investigations into deviations in the behavior of the masses from
particular norms. Thus it has become possible to study simultaneously both
the inner psychological processes of the masses and the relationship of
these processes with one or another state of solar activity, all from a single,
unified point of view. For me, this work serves as the foundation of a science of mass movements.
Research into the relationship between the behavior of the masses during various historical events and the development of sunspots has allowed
me to reach the following general conclusion: 

- prolonged mass movements flow according to the cycle of solar activity and demonstrate fluctuations
synchronous with this cycle. The behavior of the masses, expressed in varying degrees of neuropsychological excitability, undergoes fluctuations that
run precisely parallel to fluctuations in the intensity of the sunspots.

Analyzing the discrete course of each individual event and then comparing its known stages with the stages of other historical events that took
place during comparable periods of solar activity, I easily concluded that,
despite the absence of any real connection between them, they all run
an identical course, making at certain moments comparable rises, pivots, and falls."