
'''* Sharing Cities: A [[Worldwide Cities Overview on Platform Economy Policies]] with a focus on Barcelona. By Mayo Fuster Morell (ed.) et al. Dimmons Research Group, 2018.'''

URL = http://www.share.barcelona/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/SharingCities_book.pdf

"The research presented in the book was directed by Mayo
Fuster Morell and developed by Dimmons research team,
and supported by the Open University of Catalonia (UOC),
Barcelona City Council, and European Commission with the
European project DECODE: DEcentralised Citizens Owned
Data Ecosystem (European Project no. 732546)"


=Contents=

"This book is organized into three sections. 

Part one, “Sharing cities: Overview of platform economy policies” provides a chapter on public policy innovations at the field of platform economy,
a chapter on policy reactions by cities worldwide, and, finally, a
chapter on legal analysis of the challenges open up by the platform
economy at current regulations and legal frames, with a focus on
how far it has extended new forms of intellectual property.

The second part, “Qualities and models of platforms”, provide a multidisciplinary analysis and framework of the platform economy, in three chapters. First, an introduction to the whole section on qualities and models of platforms, and argumentation on the necessity to overcome current frameworks with a
multidisciplinary perspective. Finally, it presents the democratic
multidisciplinary balance of the platform economy, including an
application of the commons balance in 10 cases from Barcelona.

Then, in the frame of a multidisciplinary analysis and state of the
art, there are two chapters with disciplinary analysis of platform
economy impacts: Inclusion and discrimination perspective, with
a focus on gender, and environmental sustainability perspective.

The third part provides a focus on the Barcelona ecosystem:
A first chapter presents the policies developed by Barcelona City
Council; a second one, maps a sample of 100 cases providing
empirical insights with an analysis of the sample on the base of
the multidisciplinary framework to assess platforms qualities and
differentiate models presented in the previous chapter Finally,
there is a historical presentation of the cultural and development
roots of the vibrant collaborative oriented ecosystem in the city."

==PART I. Sharing cities: Overview of platform economy policies==

===Chapter I. Public innovation in platform economy policies===

: Platforms, policy labs, and challenges

3. Platforms

* 3.1. ShareHub Seoul ............................................................ 34
* 3.2. Oppla 
* 3.3. ShareNL - Amsterdam................................................. 37
* 3.4. Decidim.......................................................................... 3
* 3.5. Procomuns..................................................................... 39

4. Policy Labs 

* 4.1. MaRS Solutions Lab..................................................... 42
* 4.2. Mind Lab (to be closed in 2018)................................ 44
* 4.3. Other Policy Labs cases............................................... 46


===Chapter II. Sharing Cities: Overview of public policies of platform economy===

4. Collaborations among cities (tourism networks, Sharing Alliance, summits...).

===Chapter III. A legal analysis of the platform economy=== 

By Guido Smorto, University of Palermo & Marco Ciurcina, NEXA

==PART II. Qualities and models of platforms==

===Chapter IV. Qualities of the different models of platforms===


===Chapter V. Inclusion and discrimination at the platform economy===

: A gender focus


===Chapter VI. Environmental sustainability of the platform economy===

==PART III. Barcelona focus: The stage of sharing ecosystem and platform economy in Barcelona==

===Chapter VII. The Barcelona City Council with the local platform economy===

By Álvaro Porro, Comissioner for Social Economy, Local Development and Consumption, Barcelona City Council

===Chapter VIII. Barcelona sharing ecosystem: Analysis of 100 platforms and 10 paradigmatic cases===

===Chapter IX. Barcelona sharing ecosystem===

: A timeline

=Excerpts=

==The [[Platform Economy]]==

From the introduction, by Mayo Fuster Morell, Dimmons UOC:

"The platform economy (also known as collaborative platform
economy or sharing economy) is used as a floating signifier for interactions among distributed groups of people supported by digital
platforms that enable them to exchange (matching supply and
demand), share and collaborate in the consumption and production of activities leveraging capital and goods assets, and labour.

It is growing rapidly and exponentially, creating great interest, and
has become a top priority for governments around the globe.


However, it suffers from three main challenges:

1) platform economy occurs in a regulatory vacuum, with
unsystematized policy reactions and uncertainty towards which
policies may be more beneficial. Furthermore, collaborative
practices are opening up a tremendous potential and opportunity
for public innovation that is not being exploited.

2) Platform economy is creating high sustainability expectations for its potential to contribute to a sustainable development
of society (Botsman & Rogers, 2010; Cohen & Kietzmann, 2014;
Heinrichs, 2013), constituting a paradigmatic change (Rifkin,
2014). But it lacks a holistic framework for the assessment of its
sustainability. Furthermore, the sustainable design of platform
has considered questions of technological and economic aspects
but has not integrated other sustainability relevant questions,
such as environmental impact, gender and inclusion, or legal
implications, lacking a proper multidisciplinary perspective to
platform economy.

3) There is a confusion about the platforms which present
themselves as collaborative while actually, they are not; and
similar uncertainties and ambiguities associated with diverse
models. The disruptive impact of the best known platform
economy model, that of Unicorn extractionist corporation
platforms like Uber and Airbnb, is provoking huge controversy (Codagnone et al., 2016). 

Successful alternative and truly
collaborative models exist, such as open commons, platform
cooperativism and decentralized organizations based on a
social economy and open knowledge, but these have received
limited policy and research attention. Additionally, there is a
lack of a classification system that helps to establish the difference between the different models. In sum, platform economy constitutes a paradigmatic change, but assuring a positive direction to this change requires that we target these three
challenges in order to re-direct platform economy towards a
sustainable future.

In order to contribute to address these challenges, this work
primarily will provide an overview of current policy reactions
and public innovations by cities and an analysis of the legal
challenges platform economy open up. Second, the book will
provide a quality balance of the platform economy. The quality
balance is an analytical tool that helps to characterize the platforms, differentiate models by visualizing the democratic qualities of platform economy initiatives and provide insights of the sustainability implications of their design and performance
from several perspectives. This commons balance considers the
dimensions of governance, economic strategy, technological
base, knowledge policies, and impacts and social responsibility
towards the externalities of the platforms. 

On the basis of the quality balance of platform economy,
sharing or collaborative-oriented platform economy (as a type of
platform economy) can be defined as a tendency, a set of qualities, and a modality of collaborative platform economy - regarding both the design and the performance of the process - characterized by a commons approach regarding the dimensions of
governance, economic strategy, technological base, knowledge
policies, and social responsibility of the externalizations impacts
of the platforms. 

In this regard, the commons platform economy is characterized by: 

(1) favouring peer to peer relations —in contrast to the traditionally hierarchical command and contractual relationships detach from sociability, and mere mercantile
exchange— and the involvement of the community of peers
generating in the governance of the platform; 

(2) it is based on value distribution and governance among the community of
peers, and the profitability is not its main driving force; 

(3) it developed over privacy aware public infrastructure, and results in
the (generally) open access provision of commons resources that
favour access, reproducibility and derivativeness; and finally 

(4) the responsibility with the externalities generated by the process.

The design of the commons balance is informed and based
on a multidisciplinary analysis and state of the art of the platform economy from an economic, environmental, gender and
inclusion, legal and policy perspectives, and an empirical analysis
of most prominent cases of commons collaborative economy,
as well as the empirical analysis of the case of Barcelona’s commons collaborative economy ecosystem. The applicability of the commons balance will be illustrated with 10 cases of platform economy at Barcelona. In this regard, we provide firstan operationalization of the common balance, with a set of basic indicators applied to the 10 cases. 

Third, the book provides a focus into Barcelona Case Study,
regarding policies developed by the City Council by Álvaro Porro
(Comissioner for Social Economy, Local Development and
Consumption, Barcelona City Council) and a presentation of an
analysis of the current stage of Barcelona sharing ecosystem and
a contextualization of its historical roots."


See also: [[Typology of Policy Innovations To Regulate the Emerging Platform Economy]]

=More information=

* [[Sharing Cities Summit 2018]]

==About [[Dimmons]]==

"Dimmons is a research group part of the Internet Interdisciplinary Institute
(IN3) at the Open University of Catalonia (UOC). The central research line of
Dimmons is linked to socio economical innovation, collaborative economy and
commons. From this central line, the three main research areas of the group
are economical development, public policies and collaborative methodologies.
Dimmons research is based on combining rigor with frontair methodological
innovation, action research, methodological pluralism and open knowledge."
(http://www.dimmons.net)

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]

[[Category:Spain]]

[[Category:Books]]