
=Discussion=

Henry Mintzberg et al:

"We began our case for consolidating efforts across the sectors by ''calling our strategy “wordly” instead of “global.” The term “global” tends to be associated with the economic activities of multinational corporations. It has also come to imply a kind of cookie-cutter conformity. '''The term “worldly,” by contrast, is defined by the Oxford English Dictionary as “experienced in life, sophisticated, practical.” This suggests the ability to venture beyond our own world, to
appreciate the worlds of people in other cultures''', whether geographic or institutional. Worldly business people appreciate the pressures on government officials; worldly community actors understand that businesses need to be driven by commercial interests; worldly politicians realize the need for constructive consolidation of the efforts of all three sectors; and worldly people in all the sectors know how much they can learn from their counterparts in other parts of the world, poor as well as rich. We need to cultivate such worldly attitudes to formulate collaborative strategies that address climate change.''


The cycle of consolidation we propose is not about the alignment of goals, or about
consensus as a prerequisite for action. Different actors can pursue the same end for different
reasons, but in a manner supportive of each other’s efforts. In climate change, health
professionals worry about the spread of infectious diseases; diplomats may see it as a
destabilizing threat to security; and insurance companies fear the financial risk of extreme
weather events. More broadly, Pope Francis focuses on the world’s poor while conservationists
caution of the extinction of species. Yet all find some common ground in embracing a goal such
as “a safe operating space for humanity,” in the words of the Stockholm Resilience Centre.16
When institutions and sectors compete with each other for local or global power, they are
disinclined to see, let alone solve, their common problems. We have certainly experienced
enough of this. Climate change has no invisible hand to reconcile differing views, only the
visible claw of a creeping warming threatening the globe. A worldly mindset can prepare actors
to appreciate their differences, and thereby work together towards consolidated ascension, from
group to globe."
(https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2246/bc715c531f724b404a4fcdd53f25504ee9b6.pdf)

[[Category:Global Governance]]