
= refers to the World Bank's support for the Commons, and what this means poltically


=Discussion=

Silvia Federici:

" First, since at least the early 1990s, the language of the commons has been
appropriated by the World Bank and the United Nations and put at the service of
privatization. Under the guise of protecting biodiversity and conserving the global
commons, the Bank has turned rain forests into ecological reserves, has expelled the
populations that for centuries had drawn their sustenance from them, while ensuring
access to those who can pay, for instance, through eco-tourism.4 For its part, the United
Nations has revised the international law governing access to the oceans in ways that
enables governments to concentrate the use of seawaters in fewer hands, again in the
name of preserving the common heritage of mankind.5
        

The World Bank and the UN are not alone in their adaptation of the idea of the
commons to market interests. Responding to different motivations, a re-valorization of
the commons has become trendy among mainstream economists and capitalist planners;
witness the growing academic literature on the subject and its cognates: social capital,
gift economies, altruism. Witness also the official recognition of this trend through the
conferral of the Nobel Prize for Economics in 2009 to the leading voice in this field, the
political scientist Elinor Ostrom.
        
Development planners and policymakers have discovered that, under proper
conditions, a collective management of natural resources can be more efficient and less
prone to conflict than privatization, and that commons can be made to produce very well
for the market.7 They have also recognized that, carried to the extreme, the
commodification of social relations has self-defeating consequences. The extension of the
commodity form to every corner of the social factory, which neo-liberalism has
promoted, is an ideal limit for capitalist ideologues, but it is a project not only
unrealizable but undesirable from the viewpoint of long-term reproduction of the
capitalist system. Capitalist accumulation is structurally dependent on the free
appropriation of immense quantities of labor and resources that must appear as
externalities to the market, like the unpaid domestic work that women have provided,
upon which employers have relied for the reproduction of the workforce.
         
It is no accident, then, that long before the Wall Street meltdown, a variety of
economists and social theorists warned that the marketization of all spheres of life is
detrimental to the market’s well-functioning, for markets too, the argument goes, depend
on the existence of non- monetary relations like confidence, trust, and gift giving.8 In
brief, capital is learning about the virtues of the common good. 


Even the Economist, the
organ of capitalist free-market economics for more than 150 years, in its July 31, 2008
issue, cautiously joined the chorus.
         
- The economics of the “new commons” – the journal wrote – is still in its
infancy. It is too soon to be confident about its hypotheses. But it may yet
prove a useful way of thinking about problems, such as managing the
internet, intellectual property or international pollution, on which
policymakers need all the help they can get.

We must be very careful, then, not to craft the discourse on the commons in such a way
as to allow a crisis-ridden capitalist class to revive itself, posturing, for instance, as the
environmental guardian of the planet."
(http://www.commoner.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/federici-feminism-and-the-politics-of-commons.pdf)


=More Information=


#[[Capitalist Commons]]


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Global Commons]]

[[Category:Politics]]