'''= "aimed to collect the information of hospitals, hotels, factories, logistics, donations, precaution, therapies, dynamics, etc. Through unified collection and publication process."'''

URL =

=Description=

"We have endeavored to encourage more people into the development of applications and apply the power of technology into this race against the disease.



A 5K-Star Community, An Anti-Coronavirus Battle



In January 2020, a group of enthusiastic developers founded an open source community named Wuhan2020 on GitHub, which is aimed to collect the information of hospitals, hotels, factories, logistics, donations, precaution, therapies, dynamics, etc. Through unified collection and publication process, all parties could share the information, and the social resources could be effectively allocated.



"Trust, Transparency, Technology." We built Wuhan2020 to achieve these values.



This way of collaboration proved effective. On GitHub, Wuhan2020 was among trending repositories, and has gained over 5,000 stars.



While gaining widespread attention, Wuhan2020 connects over 3,000 volunteers worldwide, including developers, product managers, designers, data analysts, information collectors, translators, media workers, and students. By staff's working together under the well-arranged mechanism, this community managed to build a digital defensive line against the epidemic."
(https://www.bagevent.com/event/6368833/p/402890?)

=More information=

==Hackaton==

* Dates : March 6-8, 2020

Form of the Event：The event will be held entirely online.

Hack for Wuhan:

"If you want to join us in this battle and contribute in the open source way, here comes an opportunity, as follows. 



Hackthon Awaiting You 



As volunteers and developers of Wuhan2020 community, we would like to invite you to our Hackathon: Hack for Wuhan, on 27th and 28th February, 2020. Let us hack together against the global crisis.



We believe hackathon can not only inspire the next billion dollar unicorns, but also help unite mission-driven developers and innovators to combat an international outbreak crisis.




We are looking forward to the novel designs, prototypes, business or social impact models. We believe that all efforts will make a profound impact.



We will provide professional technical supports to your inspiration, and you will have the opportunity to work with mentors from Stanford, MIT, Harvard, Andreessen Horowitz, GSR Venture, Google, Facebook, ByteDance and startups in Silicon Valley, China, and India.



Your every single effort for this fight against COVID-19 wherein all of us could keep the humanitarian spirits and open source values, can compose stories worth telling and precious memories to remember."
(https://www.bagevent.com/event/6368833/p/402890?)


==WeChat Group of the Event==


Please scan below QR code to add Rob2020 as friend via WeChat and reply with "Hack" to join Hack for Wuhan WeChat group.

Any notification and information regarding the event are going to be published in the WeChat group in time.

If you purchased participants ticket, please fill in the Competition Entry form: https://shimo.im/sheets/H9YqPyTthRqCYj8P/MODOC

[[Category:Corona Solidarity Initiatives]]