
= xWeb is a post [[Web 2.0]] concept proposed by George Siemens

URL = http://www.connectivism.ca/?p=264


=Definition=

"xWeb is the utilization of smart, structured data drawn from our physical and virtual interactions and identities to extend our capacity to be known by others and by systems."


Some of the recurring themes:

augmentation
aggregation
semantic web
location-based services (geoweb)
data overlay
smart information
visualization
social media
open data and data in general
Internet of things
cloud computing
mobile technologies
Analytics and monitoring…

(http://www.connectivism.ca/?p=264)


=Characteristics=

George Siemens:

These comprise the key themes at the centre of the xWeb:

1. The physical and virtual worlds are blurring – as evidenced by augmented reality browsers (Layar) and services like Yelp and Foursquare

2. Data is being laid on top of physical objects (digital graffiti and contextual/historical overlays as well as the 3D web)

3. Data is becoming more intelligent – rather than simply pointing to other sources (as with urls), data is now beginning to quantify the nature of that connection.

4. Physical objects are projecting their presence into the digital (the internet of things)

5. Data is increasingly stored in the cloud, permitting better access across a range of devices

6. Data is increasingly open, permitting new/novel combinations by end users…Google maps was one of the first examples of the power of openness, many examples have followed (including open street maps)

7. The abundance of open data, new data sources (social media, sensors) and numerous data uses (overlay, digital graffiti, and social networks) sets the stage for advanced analytics about end users or the current state of mind in a society (such as Twitter trends). Connections mean things. As connections between people, people and data, and data/data become more abundant and explicit, we can gain new insights into what people are thinking and how/why they are acting.

8. Smarter data with better analysis sets the stage for personalization and adaptation of content/socialization/product provision.

9. Data+analysis+personalization requires the formation of predictive computation: “because you are in this demographic, like these types of movies, are friends with these people, you will like this particular coffee maker”. Instead of searching for data, data finds us. In a sense, data knows us."

(http://www.connectivism.ca/?p=264)


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]