

=Description=

John Robb:

"In the US alone, there's 50,000 square miles of lawns.

That's obviously a terrible waste of a very valuable resource.   

But it gets worse, we spend over $30 billion a year landscaping those yards.

We're not only wasting it, we're paying to waste it.  Wow!

One big reason a home's yard is so valuable is due to its proximity.  

It's a growing space next to where you live.  A place you see every day.  An accessible space.   

That means it is one of the best places in the world for your food garden. It's so close, it integrates growing food into your life (like the garden above, grown by [[Rad Urban Farmers]]).  

That integration gives you a measure of independence, an appreciation of what good food consists of (given how artificial and engineered so much of what we eat today is, that's a VERY good thing), and a way to impart that experience to your kids.

Of course, since most people in the developed world don't know how to grow food anymore and many of the methods and tools used to grow high quality food are still being developed, we are going to need to some help.

One great way to do that is to join a local foodscaping program.

This type of program is like a food subscription at a CSA.  However, in this program, the farmer comes to you.  He/she converts your yard into a high performance garden and teaches you how to garden it successfully.

I think that if we are smart, we'll be spending more money on [[Foodscaping]] in ten years than landscaping.   If so, good food will be available everywhere."
(http://www.resilientcommunities.com)


[[Category:Agrifood]]