
'''= lets you share or find all things gardening ... Co-gardening matching service in the Minneapolis area. '''

URL = http://www.y2g.org/

=Description=

"Yards to Gardens lets you share or find all things gardening. Whether you have extra space in your yard, extra tools in the garage, extra seeds or seedings, or just looking for a space to garden, Y2G makes it easy to share what you've got or find what you're looking for."


'''2.'''

"Yards to Gardens grew out of a realization of the tremendous potential in the vast amounts of space that we use for growing grass. Take a walk or bike through the neighborhoods around you. Imagine what these spaces would look and feel like if, instead of grass lining the sidewalks and blanketing yard after yard, there were a colorful patchwork of flowers and food bearing plants covering the urban landscape. Now imagine that each of these spaces is a collaboration, a cooperative arrangement between land owners and gardeners to create food, color, and a stronger fiber within the community.

In the Summer of 2010, Y2G got the help of some amazing volunteers through Net Impact San Francisco - an organization that connects business and marketing professionals with non-profits and growing organizations that need organizational support getting started. We are infinitely grateful to Adam and Lora Menter for connecting us to them, and helping to start establish a presence in San Francisco. So thank you to Mara and Katie for spearheading the efforts."
(http://www.y2g.org/?page=aboutus)


=More Information=

* [[Yard Scaping]]

[[Category:Sharing]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]