'''Book: You Are Not a Gadget. Jaron Lanier.'''


=Review=

Rob Horning:

"Jaron Lanier seems to believe the fate of our species is at stake. He opens You Are Not a Gadget, about the vicissitudes of information technology, with a bracing description of how the book itself will be disseminated and processed and hence “mostly will be read by nonpersons”. It’s intended as a veiled challenge: Are you still a person? Would you even know? Are you reading, or are you just processing for the benefit of the “lords of the cloud” as he calls them, the ultimate beneficiaries of all the immaterial labor we conduct online.

The gambit suggests that Lanier, a dreadlocked computer scientist credited with helping pioneer virtual reality technology, is prepared to launch into a book-length Marcusean critique of one-dimensionality, in which apparent freedoms of expression online have turned into the cloaked chains of servitude. But don’t be fooled by the fact that “manifesto” appears in the subtitle. Lanier may look as if he’s come from the digital fringe with a visionary message about the future of our networked age, but there is nothing particularly progressive about his ideas. He frequently comes across as a cranky reactionary, putting remix culture on a continuum with truly outlandish utopian ideas about posthumanity: 

Humans are free. We can commit suicide for the benefit of a Singularity. We can engineer our genes to better support an imaginary hive mind. We can make culture and journalism into second-rate activities and spend centuries remixing the detritus of the 1960s and other eras from before individual creativity went out of fashion.

Creativity, however, has never been more in fashion than it is today; the development of Web 2.0 is nothing but an endless exhortation for everyone to “share” their creativity online in various harvestable forms. What Lanier is talking about when he mentions “individual creativity” is intellectual property, which has indeed gone “out of fashion” with a substantive proportion of Internet users who exploit the medium to trade digitized culture-industry product.

Lanier purports to be concerned with humanity, but his true concern is property. Despite its old-school humanist trappings, You Are Not a Gadget is a pro-business book; its core idea is a full-throated defense of intellectual property against any notion of digital abundance, and its rhetoric is fueled by a conservative longing for culture made and administered by an elite rather than by what he sees as a fulminating rabble of plebeian amateurs. Though it may seem to unlock human potential, technology actually poses a threat to capital that must be snuffed. He proudly sees himself as a crusader for “bringing expression back under the tent of capitalism” and is prepared to support elaborate ruses to institute “artificial scarcities” to accomplish it.

Appropriately enough, considering its ideological slant, You Are Not a Gadget is written in the casual, subliterary style that editors have deemed suitable for businesspeople—in short chapters with sidebars, occasional bullet-pointed lists, and lots of subheadings to steer the easily distracted. The for-dummies format stands in defiance to one of Lanier’s main arguments, that the digitization of society encourages fragmented, dumbed-down thought and should be resisted. 

The tension between form and content—with Lanier’s metaphysical speculations about the ineffable spirit of humankind poured into a template designed to facilitate the quick, instrumentalist extraction of information—undermines the critique, generating an undertow amid the condemnations of digital freeloaders and amateur content producers and naïve techno-utopians. Underlying that critique is an assumption that becomes more and more uncomfortable the further one reads into You Are Not a Gadget: that the integrity of the human spirit is somehow bound up with the integrity of intellectual property, and that any impulse to remove the profit motive from socially necessary labor is a perverse aberration, an assault on the very concept of personhood.

Compared with where he ends up, Lanier sounds downright dialectical in the book’s first section, where he asserts that technology produces us as much as we produce it. “People degrade themselves to make machines seem smart all the time,” he claims, arguing that we lower our standards not only in order to accept good-enough technology, but to also blind ourselves to how tech developments are hemming us in. He cites a “lock-in effect” by which technological approximations of reality subsequently begin to determine that reality—the limitations of MIDI yield a music that ignores what MIDI can’t capture, the shortcomings of UNIX hamper the real-time effectiveness of the devices reliant on its legacy code, the social tools of Facebook come to constitute the boundaries of friendship, and so on. 

In each case, technology offers a convenience or expediency that seems liberating at first, affording new possibilities, only to later reveal itself as a constraint as these possibilities become real and obscure others undreamed of. “These designs came together very recently,” he warns, “and there’s a haphazard, accidental quality to them. Resist the easy grooves they guide you into. If you love a medium made of software, there’s a danger that you will become entrapped in someone else’s recent careless thoughts.”

'''...'''

Though Lanier’s critique shares some Marcusean assumptions about the flattening of cultural possibilities (“The deep meaning of personhood is being reduced by the illusion of bits,” he writes) he never goes as far as blaming the existing power structure. Far from attributing these ills to the imperatives of capitalism, he’s more inclined to blame individuals for failing to uphold a quasi-Randian resistance to sharing.

In his critique, Lanier appears to be guided by a distrust of all collective enterprises online, which he argues, in high Cold War dudgeon, have become a form of “digital Maoism” that nullifies the individual spirit while endeavoring to turn all the idealistic dupes who participate in them into robot slaves to the evil, mediocre hive mind. That we might be capable of sustaining a series of group identifications while preserving and perhaps even enhancing a core self seems not to have been considered. 

Instead, identity is zero sum—if we are participating in the “wisdom of crowds,” we are a nonperson who has outsourced our autonomy. If we adopt the objective tone of Wikipedia, we have surrendered our belief in the personal point of view, in our very right to have opinions of our own.

Though he presents himself as the last defender of human potential, Lanier regards artists as entrepreneurs first and foremost; those who are not motivated by profit he regards as dilettantes whose work is inherently bad. “We forget what a wonder, what a breath of fresh air it has been to have creative people make their way in the world of commerce,” he rhapsodizes, substituting market discipline and capitalism’s imperative creative destruction for plain old creativity. 

He argues that artistic production for markets is more unconstrained than production for a patron, as if there were no constraints in having to appeal to the lowest common denominator and as if no one ever successfully created art as a sideline, without patrons at all,  in the manner, say, of insurance-company lawyer Wallace Stevens, or Anthony Trollope, who managed to grind out triple-decker novels for years while working full-time for the post office, not to mention folk artists like James Hampton. Such people, in Lanier’s eyes, pursue art as a “vanity career” since it is not the source of their livelihood.

We get a glimpse of what Lanier’s ideal arrangement would be when he champions closed models of product development. His examples include “The iPhone, the Pixar movies, and all the other beloved successes of digital culture that involve innovation in the result as opposed to the ideology of creation. In each case, these are personal expressions.True, they often involve large groups of collaborators, but there is always a central personal vision—a Will Wright, a Steve Jobs, or a Brad Bird conceiving the vision and directing a team of people earning salaries.” Creativity, then, and personal expression are best limited to those towering figures with the capital amassed to recruit an army of wage slaves to implement their vision. If you happen to be one of those soldiers, then you best figure out how to make some more money.

Money, it turns out, is the only measuring stick, overriding Lanier’s earlier paeans to the ineffability of the human experience. The implication of Lanier’s argument is that people are motivated to create only by rewards rather than by the pleasure of creation or participation itself, an assertion belied by Web 2.0 voluntarism. “In the open culture future, your creativity and expression would also be unpaid, since you would be a volunteer in the army of the long tail. That would leave nothing for you.” 

Nothing, that is, except the pleasure that stems from creative work itself, the solidarity that derives from participation, the satisfaction of contributing useful social labor, and the expanded potential for recognition expressed in non-monetary terms.

Lanier attempts to steer around this conundrum by arguing that the online behavior is inauthentic creativity, with authenticity being validated by money. “I believe most people would embrace a social contract in which bits have value instead of being free,” he explains. “Everyone would have easy access to everyone else’s creative bits at reasonable prices—and everyone would get paid for their bits. The arrangement would celebrate personhood in full, because personal expression would be valued.” In this equation, personhood equals paid content; it can only be “valued” commercially.

Such an arrangement underlies his proposal for a content vault and a prohibition of the digital duplication of any piece of intellectual property. He imagines a world where music files are locked with digital keys he calls “songles”, which we might carry around stored on wireless necklaces. He imagines this will help foster new creativity, not merely because it would secure payment for artists, but because “Once a person buys a songle, she is motivated to join in promoting its music, because she now has a stake in it.” Listening for her own enjoyment apparently is not enough of a “stake”. No one gets paid for appreciating things, after all.

There’s good reason to be skeptical of Web 2.0 and a future that promises to be increasingly mediated and funneled through gadgetry (though Lanier’s strange, incongruous concluding section, in which he reports that octopuses are probably higher lifeforms than humans and celebrates morphing in virtual reality as a higher form of communication seems to cast doubt on his own doubts). There’s reason to expect these changes to further transform the production and distribution of goods, meaning that some measure of structural unemployment is probably inevitable.

However, a backward-looking effort to stifle the creation of a digital surplus, to institute artificial scarcities to put capital’s dead hand more tightly around our throats, doesn’t serve the cause of innovation or freedom. In that surplus, which doesn’t vanish simply because it is not commerce, is the chance for a new relation between production and labor, at the very least the opportunity to recast the terms of domination in such a way as to amelieorate or abrogate them grows. 

The “hive mind”—the collective wellspring of knowledge that exceeds the limits of property—need not only yield mediocrity, as Lanier assumes. Instead, it has the potential to redraw the boundaries of market society, opening up new social spaces. The imperfect methods of production no longer organized by capital can be improved. The manifest reality of the social factory in the form of the internet has mobilized more creative energy than was ever before possible, ever if the creators can only benefit from it at the social rather than the individual level. 

These levels can coexist, if the new modes of production can escape their commercial origins. Now that the link between creativity and capital has finally begun to be severed, let’s not reforge our own chains."
(http://www.popmatters.com/pm/tools/print/120581)


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]