
'''* Report: Your Business in the We Economy. 2015'''

URL = http://www.dea.nu/sites/dea.nu/files/your_business_in_the_we-economy_digital.pdf


=Description=

"The collaborative economy, the sharing economy, co-creation…

These are some of the terms used to describe what is more or less the same phenomenon: That it is becoming easier, cheaper and more effective to involve a wider range of participants in creating value.

Users are increasingly contributing to create solutions, and a whole new layer of small, private resources can be mobilized and put to more productive use. A new type of players in business are enabling this; the platforms that coordinate the interaction and exchanges. Some of these companies have grown into global giants and serious disruptors of conventional businesses in a very short time. Clearly, deep changes are in motion. No wonder there has been a lot of interest in understanding these trends. We call it the We-economy, because basically it’s about understanding that the next level of value creation will happen by combining and coordinating, by involving others and by drawing on their resources and skills.

Businesses will need to rethink the way they organize value creation if they want to benefit from collaboration. A collaborative approach affects all parts of the business model – sometimes in ways that challenge the fundamentals of the conventional logic in economy.

Changing to take a WE-approach can be a tough challenge to a company’s conventional way of thinking. It can feel both risky and inconvenient to open up to ideas from the outside, linking your success to others’, and engaging with all the other stakeholders that are part of creating the end-user’s experience. Increasingly, however, going it alone is not adequate to create the sort of solutions and value that the market demands.

This guide will give you some suggestions on how to do it right."
(http://we-economy.net/?page_id=928)


[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]

[[Category:Social Business Design]]

[[Category:Articles]]