'''Book: THE YOUTUBE READER. Pelle Snickars and Patrick Vonderau (eds). Published by the National Library of Sweden, June 2009'''


=Description=

"Over the last few years YouTube has become the very epitome of digital culture. With more than 70 million unique users each month and approximately 100 million videos online, this brand-name video
distribution platform holds the richest repository of popular culture on the Internet. As the fastest growing site in the history of the Web, YouTube promises endless new opportunities for amateur video, political campaigning, entertainment formats and viral marketing – a clip culture seemingly outpacing both cinema and television. The YouTube Reader is the first full-length book to explore YouTube as an industry, an archive and a cultural form. This remarkable volume brings together renowned film and media scholars in a discussion of the potentials and pitfalls of 'broadcasting yourself'. The YouTube Reader confronts prevalent claims to newness, immediacy or popularity with systematic and theoretically informed arguments. It offers a closer look at both texts accessible via YouTube and policies and norms governing how they are accessed and used. Among the contributors are Thomas Elsaesser, Richard Grusin, Bernard Stiegler, Toby Miller, William Uricchio and Janet Wasko."
(http://www.wallflowerpress.co.uk/product/new-titles/youtube_reader)


=More Information=

See also the book:

YouTube: [[Online Video and Participatory Culture]]. By: Jean Burgess (Queensland University of Technology) and Joshua Green (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA). Polity Press, 2009


[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]

[[Category:Books]]