
=Bio=

Zachary Stein:

"I studied philosophy and religion at Hampshire College, and then educational neuroscience, human development, and the philosophy of education at Harvard University. While a student at Harvard, I co-founded what would become Lectica, Inc., a non-profit dedicated to the research-based, justice-oriented reform of large-scale standardized testing in K-12, higher-education, and business.
​
I’ve published two books.  Social Justice and Educational Measurement was based on my dissertation and traces the history of standardized testing and its ethical implications. My second book,  Education in a Time Between Worlds, expands the philosophical work to include grappling with the relations between schooling and technology more broadly. I also write for peer-reviewed academic journals across a range of topics including the philosophy of learning, educational technology, and integral theory. My work has appeared in a variety of journals including, American Psychologist, New Ideas in Psychology, Mind, Brain, and Education, Integral Review, and the Journal of Philosophy of Education. 

...

These days:

* I am co-founder of The [[Consilience Project]], which is dedicated to improving public sensemaking and building a movement to radically upgrade digital media landscapes.

* I am a scholar at the [[Ronin Institute]], where I research the relations between education, human development, and the evolution of civilizations.

* I serve as Co-President and  Academic Director of the activist think-tank at the [[Center for Integral Wisdom]], where I write and teach at the edges of integral meta-theory."

(http://www.zakstein.org/about.html)

[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]