
URL = https://www.preferzen.com/

=Description=

"The rise of Bitcoin has shown that the world is ready for a digital currency. But should that currency be Bitcoin? While undeniably an intriguing and innovative experiment, Bitcoin has two cardinal flaws. It is too inherently unstable for practical use, and it is shockingly wasteful and destructive. 

The Zen's value is tied to the performance of 22 international currencies from major economies on five continents. Even if any one of these currencies were to collapse, the value of the Zen wouldn't be affected greatly. The Zen has even been designed to withstand swings in the value of the USD. As such it the Zen is stable by design, and it is possible to develop a sophisticated and viable economy using Zen alone. It is entirely possible that major corporations and even nation-states will one day use Zen as a medium of exchange to safeguard against exchange rate fluctuations between traditional currencies. 

Increasing the supply of zen does not involve any heavy number crunching. The Zen money supply can be regulated to prevent inflation or deflation. Since the Zen is issued in exchange for legal tender rather than mined, the Zen does not result in massive amounts of electricity and computing power being wasted on currency creation. The Zen is possibly the greenest currency in the world as it is not printed on paper, nor minted in metal, nor extracted by dint of raw computing power. 

Then Zen is issued by a transparent democratically managed organization with open-book accounting. Anyone with time and interest can become involved just by becoming a member. While you may not always agree with how the money is used, at least you know where it is going."
(https://www.preferzen.com/)


=More Information=

* about page at https://www.preferzen.com/z.r?a=zen_about
* faq at https://www.preferzen.com/z.r?a=zen_faq


[[Category:Money]]