
=Discussion=

Jennifer Gidley:

" Based on extensive research Mary Settegast integrates this historical and archaeological evidence with the oral traditions of ancient Persia and argues that this original   Zarathustra (circa 6,200-6,500 BCE) led his people through the transition from the nomadic to the agricultural life—including building settlements that developed into cities, creating and decorating fine ceramics, and eventually, within the same lineage, to developing some of the first writing—cuneiform writing on clay tablets (Settegast, 2005).

Steiner’s claimed, that an earlier Zarathustra pre-dated the historical figure by several thousand years (Settegast, 2005). At the very least, these unconventional views of Steiner and Settegast pose new questions about the history and development of this highly significant region. As an indication of the lingering magic consciousness, Steiner referred to the leading people of this culture as the Magi —who he claimed had retained some of the magical powers of the earlier times (Steiner, 1910/1939, p. 204). Settegast also makes reference to the Magi , regarding them as an Order said to have been founded by Zarathustra (Settegast, 2005).The dualism of Light versus Dark became a central teaching in Zoroastrianism, which arguably influenced the monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam that also developed in this general geographical region. Gebser also suggests that Zarathustra’s dualism underlies Parmenides’ (b. 540 BCE) notion of Being opposed to Non-Being, which intriguingly straddles the next transition from mythical to mental consciousness."

(https://www.academia.edu/197841/The_Evolution_of_Consciousness_as_a_Planetary_Imperative_An_Integration_of_Integral_Views)



=More information=

* Zoroastrianism and Parsiism. (2007). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved June 2, 2007, from Britannica Concise Encyclopedia: http://concise.britannica.com/ebc/article-9383384/Zoroastrianism-and-Parsiism

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]
[[Category:Spirituality]]