

=Description=

Katarina Stanoevska-Slabeva: 

"According to the basic definition of crowdsourcing, its main initiators are
companies. However, existing online platforms which support the creation
sharing and collaborative creation of user generated content in many cases
provide suitable environments where users can become the initiators of
crowdsourcing as well. This can be illustrated on the example of the relaunch of
‘Snacketti-Zwiebelringe’, the onion rings product of the company Zweifel in the
Swiss market (see also Kowalski, 2011 and Lüscher, 2010).

In summer 2009, two Facebook users established independent of each other
a group on Facebook dedicated to the request and wish to have the product
Snacketti-Zwiebelringe (onion rings) back on the Swiss market. The same product
was produced earlier by the company Zweifel. It was taken off the market 14
years ago because the market was not considered big enough by the company.
Within 1 year of the launch of the groups, the groups were able to recruit together
12,000 ‘likers’ and contributors. The voices requesting the onion rings back on the
market became louder and more demanding.

The company Zweifel at first only observed what was going on at the two
groups. As the groups became more popular and were able to recruit a critical
mass of users, they started to communicate with the groups and considered the
request on strategic level. As soon as the company started to think about the
request of the users on a strategic level, they started also to communicate the
different steps of the process within the two groups. Finally the users were
informed that Zweifel has decided to start the production of onion rings and to
introduce the product again to the Swiss market. In September 2010, 380 users,
members of the two groups, participated on the opening event of the production
of the onion rings."
(http://berlinsymposium.org/sites/berlinsymposium.org/files/crowdsourcingenabledinnovation.pdf) 

=More Information=

* [[Category:Cases]]
* [[Zweifel - User-Initiated Crowdsourcing]]

[[Category:Business]]

[[Category:Collaborative Economy]]