
'''* Festival: 4th Festival for Solidarity & Cooperative Economy ; 16-17-18th of October, 2015 in Academia Platonos Park- Athens'''

URL = http://www.festival4sce.org

=Description=

Martin Mair:

"Members of various solidarity networks, cooperative initiatives and
innovative structures in Greece organise, for the fourth time in a row, the
Festival for Solidarity & Cooperative Economy.

The festival will take place in Athens in the 16-17-18th of October in
Plato’s Academy Park.

This year we would like to focus exclusively in action and highlight
remarkable practices aiming to inspire society and prove that there are
those alternatives that can help us meet our needs.

We want to open more to society and to shout even louder our slogan
"*Anotherworld is real*" and necessary more than ever. A world based on creativity,
self-sufficiency, sustainability and solidarity.

For this reason we will create in the festival, an autonomous village in
which practical workshops will be held, answers to basic questions will be
given and discussions will be taking place.

In the thematic corners of the village, the visitor will be able to meet or
learn how to cover his needs for food, health, education, labor, energy,
technology, housing, transportation etc. and find a way to express himself
and create with his fellow villagers.

Inside the festival will also function our alternative currency that we
will use to make transactions with selected producers.

Clothes and books exchange bazaar and collective kitchen will take place.

People offering work (villagers) will be rewarded with free food for their
services .

The aim of the festival is to give a practical example of another world
that is here, to prove that we can live in a different way.

There will be presented an important effort to continuity of the
functioning of the autonomous village beyond the end of the festival,
through the creation of the Integral Cooperative in Athens.

The Solidarity & Cooperative Economy Festival advocates a world that
promotes communication and mutual exchange aiming to move towards a society
based on participation and cooperation, self-management, solidarity,
sustainability, self-sufficiency and respect to nature and human.

We want the festival to speak to the hearts of those who seek alternative
humane solutions. To provide inspiration for launching similar initiatives
in other greek cities.

We want to unite and together make it happen."


=More Information=

Website: http://www.festival4sce.org

Ε-mail: festival.economicsolidarity@gmail.com


[[Category:Solidarity Economy]]

[[Category:Conferences]]

[[Category:Greece]]